Under the Mountain Wall

Also by Peter Matthiessen
FICTION

Raditzer
Partisans
Race Rock
NON-FICTION

The Cloud Forest
Wildlife in America

Copyright © 1962 by Peter Matthiessen
All rights reserved
First published in 1962 by TheVail-BallouPress, Inc.
625 Madison Avenue, New York 22, New York
Published simultaneously in Canada by
The Macmillan Company of Canada Limited
All photographs copyright 1962 by the Film Study Center,
Peabody Museum, Harvard University, Cambridge 38, Massachusetts.
They may not be reproduced in any form, except for the use of
not more than four photographs as illustrations for a review of the book,
without the written permission of the Film Study Center.
A portion of the text has appeared in somewhat different
form in Harper's.
Library of Congress catalog card number 62-16796
Printed in the U.S.A. by The Vail-Ballou Press

For Deborah, with love

In warm memory of
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER

whose interest and generosity were a major
contribution to the Harvard-Peabody Expedition of 1961.
though he did not live to see the achievement of the Expedition,
his participation was crucial to its success.

• viii

Contents

Front Endpaper: Map of the Southern Kurelu
Rear Endpaper: from a drawing by Michael Rockefeller

Preface
List of Illustrations, Section I
Photographic Section I: The Kurelu

xi
xv
following xvi

1-256

Under the Mountain Wall

Photographic Section II: The People of the Book
following 256

List of Illustrations, Section II
Acknowledgments
Diagram: Village of Wuperainma
Glossary of Personal Names
Dani Words Used Commonly in Text

xxvi

Index

xxvii

xvii
xx
xxi
xxii

Title-page photograph by Eliot Elisofon
Drawings of Kurelu artifacts scattered through the text
are by Otto van Eersel
•

ix

x•

Preface

The peaks of the Snow Mountains, on bright
mornings, part the dense clouds and soar into the skies of
Oceania. Beneath the clouds, like a world submerged, lie
the dark rocks which form the great island of New Guinea;
climbing abruptly from the Dampier Strait in the East Indies, the range extends eastward fifteen hundred miles until,
at land's end in Papua, it sinks once more beneath the ocean.
The Snow Mountains are the summit of western New
Guinea. On a high flank in the central highlands lies a sudden valley: here the Baliem River, which had vanished underground some twenty miles upstream, bursts from the
mountain wall onto a great green plain. The plain itself, ten
miles across, is a mile above the sea. Fifty miles southeast
of the valley's head, the river drops into a gorge and passes
from the mountains, to subside at last in the vast marshes of
sun and mud and sago palms stretching southward to the
Arafura Sea.
The Baliem Valley was discovered from the air in 1938,
but no white man came to live there until 1954, when a government post was established on abandoned lands of the
Wukahupi tribes. Dutch patrols have now explored much of
•

xi

the valley, which supports more than forty thousand people,
and the last large blank on the most recent maps is a region
of perhaps thirty square miles under the northeast wall.
This remote corner is controlled by those tribes of the
Ndani or Dani-speaking peoples known as the Kurelu; the
Dani language, with small tribal variations, is spoken
throughout the valley and beyond, yet it is but one of many
distinct languages in the central highlands. (The origins of
these languages, like the origins of the people themselves,
are virtually unknown. One may suppose that the mountain
Papuans came out from Asia long before the Polynesians—
though in the wake of the Australian aborigines—and that
they were forced into the mountains by peoples who came
after, but the near absence of archaelogical evidence makes
any attempt at chronology unintelligent.) The region is bordered in the south by the Aike River and in the west, toward
the Baliem, by the lands of the enemy Wittaia. In the north
and east it ends abruptly at the mountain wall. The wall
rises in a series of steep ridges to an outer rim which varies,
around the valley, from ten to twelve thousand feet in elevation; the upper wall is rarely seen. All day, all year, the
clouds balance on the rim, as if about to tumble in. They are
dark and still and all but permanent, protecting the great
valley from infecting winds.
The Kurelu are named for the tribal kain or leader: their
country, that is, is "Kurelu's Land." The tribe is divided into
four main groups: the Loro-Mabell to the northward, the
Kosi-Alua from the western grasslands, the Haiman-Halluk,
between the Kosi-Alua and the mountains, and the Wilihiman-Walalua, in the south. The Wilihiman-Walalua is the
people's contraction of four clan names (Wilil:HaimanWalilo:Alua) and represents, politically, a union of allied
villages. Several such unions, linked by clan or more or less
well disposed toward one another, may form a loose conx ii

•

federacy and are led by the most powerful kain—in this
case, Kurelu, kain of the Loro-Mabell. Their boundaries are
fluid and informal, dependent on the predominance of clan,
though the clans are spread throughout the villages. The
clan Alua, for example, is well represented not only in the
Wilihiman-Walalua but in the Kosi-Alua. The latter groups
share a common frontier with the enemy and may be called
the southern Kurelu.
Because the southern Kurelu were entirely untouched
by civilization, their culture was chosen for study by the
Harvard-Peabody Expedition of 1961. The expedition, sponsored in part by the government of the Netherlands, entered the Baliem at the end of March and remained until
September, with the cooperation and assistance of the Dutch
officials, particularly Dr. Victor de Bruyn of the Office of
Native Affairs. Its purpose was to live among the people as
unobtrusively as possible and to film and record their wars,
rituals, and daily life with a minimum of interference, in
order that a true picture of a Stone Age culture—one of the
few in which both war and agriculture are important—might
be preserved.
This book is a chronicle of two seasons in the Stone Age.
The few details and episodes not actually witnessed by the
author were supplied and confirmed by other members of
the party—Robert Gardner, cameraman and leader of the
expedition whose film, Dead Birds, concerns the Kurelu;
Karl G. Heider, anthropologist; Jan Broekhuyse, anthropologist; Michael Rockefeller, photographer and sound technician. The expedition was joined by photographer Eliot
Elisofon for the month of May; by botanist Chris Versteegh
for two weeks in June; and by medical student Samuel
Putnam in July and August; it was assisted immeasurably
by the talents and good company of its Dani interpreter,
Abututi, with his wife, Wamoko, and of its cook, Yusip.
•

xiii

All of these have made important contributions to
this book, but I am particularly indebted to Jan Broekhuyse,
whose year of prior experience with other Baliem tribes
proved invaluable in the gathering and assessment of information, and to Karl Heider, who remained with the
Kurelu after the departure of the expedition and has since
supplied extensive data and corrections. Heider, Broekhuyse,
and Gardner have been kind enough to inspect the manuscript for errors and distortions, and within the limits of our
present understanding of the culture an honest portrait of
the Kurelu has been attempted.
This is the story of the great warrior Weaklekek and of
the swineherd Tukum, of U-mue and his family, and of their
enemies and friends. The events described were observed
to have happened to these tribesmen, called by these names,
in the spring and summer of 1961—though occasionally,
minor actions of one person have been attributed to another,
to avoid a confusing multiplicity of characters. The glossary
in the back of the book will serve as a key to the dramatis
personae as well as to pronunciation.
Reference to the tribe's exposure to the expedition has
been omitted, not only because the first reactions of a wild
people to the white man, affecting and sad and funny though
they are, have been well documented, but because the Kurelu offered a unique chance, perhaps the last, to describe a
lost culture in the terrible beauty of its pure estate. The
armed patrols and missionaries invaded their land on the
heels of the expedition, and by the time this account of them
is published, the proud and warlike Kurelu will be no more
than another backward people, crouched in the long shadow
of the white man.

xiv

•

Photographic Section I:

THE KURELU

War on the Tokolik
2 A Charge of the Kurelu
3 Skirmish on the Waraba
4 The Front Line
5 The Wittaia Move Forward
6 Man Wounded
7 Funeral: Men Mourning
8 Funeral
9 Funeral: The Death Chair
10 Funeral: The Women
11 The Dead Man (Ekitamalek)
12 The Women: Dancing in Etai
(man on left is Ekali)
13 The Women: The Cooking Pit
14 The Women: Weaving Fiber
15 The Women: Morning Pasture
16 The Children
17 The Children
1

PETER MATTHIESSEN
KARL HEIDER
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
PETER MATTHIESSEN
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
SAMUEL PUTNAM
PETER MATTHIESSEN
PETER MATTHIESSEN
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
JAN BROEKHUYSE

MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
JAN BROEKHUYSE
JAN BROEKHUYSE
SAMUEL PUTNAM
SAMUEL PUTNAM
SAMUEL PUTNAM
•

xv

The Children
KARL HEIDER
19 The Children
SAMUEL PUTNAM
20 The Men: Rebuilding the Kaio at Fuakal oba
JAN BROEKHUYSE
21 The Men: Rock Fire
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
22 The Men: Completion of the Kaio
JAN BROEKHUYSE
23 Skirmish
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLEH
24 Waiting for Battle
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
25 Twilight Battle, Waraba
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
26 Etai
SAMUEL PUTNAM
27 Etai
PETER MATTHIESSEN
18

xvi

•

11

22

Under the Mountain Wall

One morning in April, in the year when the old

history of the Kurelu came to an end, a man named Weaklekek started down the mountain from the hill village of
Lokoparek. He did not go by the straight path, which descends through a tangle of pandanus and bamboo onto the
open hillsides, but instead went west, through the forest beneath the cliff. The cliff was a sheer face of yellow limestone
black-smeared with green algae, and the tree line of its crest
wavered in mist. With the sun rising behind it, the mist appeared illumined from within.
The rains of April had been heavy, and the path was a
glutinous mire pocked by the hooves of pigs; he walked it
swiftly, his bare feet feeling cleverly for the root or rock that
would give them purchase, and at the stream he ran across
the log. The path climbed steeply to a grove of tropical
chestnuts, tall, with small leaves of green-bronze, and there
he paused a moment to peer out through the forest shades.
Though he could not see it, the sun had mounted from behind the cliff. Below, the valley floor and its far wall steamed
in an early light, but the forest would stay dank and somber
until the cloud above his head had burned away.
Weaklekek moved on to a point where the wood ended
• 3

in a clearing between great boulders; the wood edge leapt
with plants of light and shade, the most striking of which
was a great rhododendron, its white blossoms broader than
his hand. In the shadows and clefts of the boulders, wood
ferns in wild variety uncurled from among the liverworts
and lichens, the mosses and silver fungi. The ferns were the
triumphant plant of the high forest, with species numbering
in the hundreds, but Weaklekek was oblivious of the ferns,
of all the details of his world which could not immediately
be put to use. The ferns, like the mist hung on the cliffs, the
squall of parrots echoing on the walls, the sun, the distant
river, were part of him as he was part of them: they were
inside him, behind the shadows of his brown eyes, and not
before him. He would see a certain fern when he needed it
for dressing pig, and another from which pith was taken to
roll thread, but the rest withdrew into the landscape.
The experience of his eye was not his own. It was thousands of years old, immutable, passed along as certainly and
inevitably as his dark skin, the cast of his quick face. These
characters were more variable than experience, for experience was static in the valley; it was older than time itself,
for time was a thing of but two generations, dated by moons
and ending with the day in which he found himself. Before
the father of Weaklekek's father was the ancestor of the people: his name was Nopu, and he came from the high mountains with a wife and a great bundle of living things. Nopu's
children were the founders of the clans, with names like
Haiman, Alua, Kosi, Wilil, and they had opened the life
bundle against Nopu's will, releasing the mosquitoes and the
snakes upon all the people, the akuni, who came after.
Nopu was the common ancestor, but perhaps he was
also that first Papuan who, one hour in the long infinity of
days, from the forest of the mountain passes, saw the green
valley of the Baliem River far below him in the sunny
4 •

haze. How many years, or centuries of years, this man had
wandered out of Africa and Asia may never be known, for
he traveled lightly, and he left no trail.
Before the coming of Nopu, in the millenniums of silence, the greatest of the valley's creatures was a bird, the
cassowary. Birds of paradise, red, emerald, golden, and
night-blue, fluttered, huffed, and screeched among the fern
and orchid gardens of the higher limbs. Hawks and swiftlets
coursed the torpid airs, and the common sandpiper of Africa
and Eurasia flew south like a messenger from another earth
to teeter on the margins of its streams. In stands of great
evergreen araucaria, in oak-chestnut forest and river jungle,
a primitive fauna of small marsupials, with a few bats and
rodents, prospered in habitats long since pre-empted, elsewhere on the earth, by the cats and weasels, dogs, bears,
hoofed animals, and apes: the marsupials, stranded on these
mountain outposts of the Australian continental shelf by the
wax and wane of ice-age seas, became carnivores and insectivores and, in the wallabies and kangaroos, strange herbivores of the high grasslands.
Then that first man—perhaps Nopu, perhaps another
—reached the coast, and eventually the inner mountains; he
occupied the valley, with his women and children, his bow,
bamboo knife, and stone adze. Like the mountain wallaby,
the cuscus, and the phalanger, he had cut himself off from a
world which rolled on without him. The food in the valley
forests was plentiful, and he had brought with him—or there
came soon after—the sweet potato, dog, and pig. The jungle
and mountain, the wall of clouds, the centuries, secured him
from the navigators and explorers who touched the coasts
and went away again; he remained in his stone culture. In
the last corners of the valley, he remains there still, under
the mountain wall. His name is not Nopu, for he is the son
of Nopu's son, but he is the same man.
• 5

So now he paused to take in his surroundings, standing gracefully, his weight balanced on his right leg and upright spear. His right hand, holding the spear, was at the
level of his chin, and the spear itself, sixteen feet long, rose
to a point which drew taut, as he stood there, the stillness
of the forest. The spear was carved from the red wood of
the yoli myrtle, and a pale yoli, its smooth bark scaling like
reptilian skin, stood like the leg of a great dinosaur behind
him.
Weaklekek was darker than most Dani, a dark brown
which looked black, and the blackness of his naked body
was set off by the white symmetries of his snail-shell bib.
He looked taller than his five feet and a half, lean and catmuscled, with narrow shoulders and flat narrow hips. At rest
on the long spear, he gave an impression of indolent grace, a
grace by no means gentle but rather a kind of coiling which
permitted him to move quickly from a still position.
He stood there watching, watching. The landscape as it
was, had always been, his eye shut out. The stir of change,
the detail out of place, was what he hunted: a distant movement, a stray smoke, a silence where a honey eater sang, a
whoop of warning. Across the valley other men stood watching at this moment, under the long spear, for today there
would be war.
From where he stood, still as a snake, the southern territories of Kurelu's Land spread before him. The narrow gully
of the upper Aike dropped away on his left hand, the hill
brush of its edges giving way as the land leveled to a riverain forest ruled by casuarina. Before him rose the smoke of
morning fires, though the villages themselves—Abukumo,
Homaklep, and Wuperainma—were not visible. On his right
hand the cliff curved outward from the valley rim; it declined
rapidly to a rocky hill, and finally a steep grassy slope, which
plummeted for several hundred feet into a stand of giant
6 •

araucarias at its foot. The three villages lay in a kind of
pocket in the mountain flank, between the steep hill and
the Aike River.
The araucarias were straight and tall, well over one hundred feet, with tiers of branches curving upward, and needles clustered in great balls, like ornaments. The araucaria
was an ancient tree, disappearing from the valley, from the
world; each needle of this tree grew very old, refracting
the sparkle of the dew for forty years and more.
Directly below Wuperainma a small wood surrounded
lowland brooks. The far part of the wood could be seen from
where he stood, and beyond it a fringe of long-grass savanna,
scattered with bushes, sloped to the bottom lands and drainage ditches of the sweet-potato fields. The bed of purple,
veined by silver water, spread unbroken for a mile, ending
at a far line of trees. Beyond the trees a marshy swale marked
the frontier; it continued into no man's land, surrounding a
low rocky rise, the Waraba, and the near face of a pyramidal
hill, the Siobara. The Siobara stood in Wittaia territory, and
Wittaia fields and villages lay to both sides of it. Behind the
Siobara a hairy spine of casuarina marked the course of the
Baliem along the valley floor, and beyond the river a subsidiary valley mounted steeply to the cloud forest beneath
the western walls.
The trail wound down the slopes toward Wuperainma,
passing alternately through low woodland and open brush;
the bare feet of many years had beaten away the grass and
the thin topsoil, laying bare the chalky white of a fine quartzitic sand. When dry, this sand was as soft as powder, but in
the rain it glazed to a smooth hardness. The white sand
erupted in great spots across the valley, and from where
Weaklekek walked three patches of it could be seen, like
snowfields, at the base of the Siobara and on the farther hills
to the southwest.
• 7

The limestone soil supported many plants in various
stages of new flowering. Flowering and fading occurred in
the same plant at once, the blossoms and burning leaves, for
there was no autumn in the valley. The leaves died one by
one and were replaced, so that the foliage of each plant was
brilliant red and green against the hillside. The equatorial
monsoons which brought a rainy season to the coasts had
small effect here in the highlands; from moon to moon, the
rainfall varied little. Winter, summer, autumn, spring were
involuted, turning in upon themselves, a slow circling of
time.
Weaklekek moved swiftly down the mountain. At a certain point he paused and called out toward the cliff—WeAK-le-kek! And when the voice returned to him, AK-le-kek,le-kek, he grinned uneasily, for this was the voice of his own
spirit. On the lower slopes the pigeon, yoroick, called its own
name dolefully, and from far below, where the sun was shining, the bird was answered by the high voice of a boy.

At dawn that morning the enemy began chanting,
and the chant, hoo, hoo, hoo, ua, ua, rolled across the fields
toward the mountains. The fields were tattered still with
mist, and a cloud hung on the valley floor, submerging the
line of trees at the frontier. A man ran past the wood of
araucaria, called Homuak after the spring which, rising silently from among the bony roots, flows out and dies in the
savanna; Homuak lies at the foot of the steep hill near Wuperainma. He cried out urgently, his voice a solitary echo of
the wail from behind the mist. The call was taken up on the
8 •

far side of the hill and trailed off northward to the villages
of Kurelu.
The wood of Homuak was strangely empty. The black
robin chat and a yellow whistler sang in the evergreens, in
the rich voice of new nesting, and the night's rain fell in soft
drops from the needles. High behind the still village of Wuperainma the sun rolled up onto the rim, and the mists creeping on the fields slowly dispersed. Still the Wittaia chanted,
and the answer grew in all the villages.
A puna lizard, two feet long, with dinosaur spines and
heavy head, crept out along a branch of araucaria, seeking the sun; its long whip tail, trailing behind, slid silently
on the rough bark.
Small bands of warriors were moving out toward the
frontier. The men carried their spears and bows and arrows,
and the boys ran behind them. A figure climbed slowly to
the top of a kaio, one of the many lookout towers visible
from the wood; the kaio is built of tall young saplings bound
into a column by liana thongs, and rises to a stick platform
some twenty-five feet above the ground. The kaios, erected
in defense against raids upon the gardens, march across the
distances like black lonely trees. At the base of each kaio
is a thatched shelter, and here the warriors assembled, leaning their spears against the roof.
Beyond the kaios and gardens lies a thin woodland,
then a swale of cane and sedge, and at the far edge of
the swale a solitary conifer. The tree marks the edge of the
Tokolik, a grassy fairway nearly two miles long, paralleling
the frontier. The Tokolik is the high ground of the swamp
of no man's land; on its far side a brushy bog occurs, scattered with dark tannin pools and reeds and sphagnum.
The bog extends to the base of a low ridge, the Waraba,
and beyond the ridge is the sudden pyramid, the Siobara,
like a great fore bulwark of the enemy. In the middle
• 9

of the Tokolik, just southward of the tree, lies a shallow
grassy pool. Small streams have been diked to form the several pools on the frontier; black ducks with striped cinnamon heads frequent the pools, and the people know that
the clamor of their flight might betray a raiding party of
the enemy.
From the foothills at the south end of the fairway the
smoke of a Wittaia fire curled, to lose itself at last against the
roll of cloud which cut the valley floor from the dark rim.
Near the fire Wittaia warriors were ranked, their spear
tips clean as lances on the sky. A larger group, convening on the Tokolik itself, raised a new howling, broken by
rhythmic barks. Before the sun had warmed the air, three
hundred or more Wittaia had appeared.
At the north end of the Tokolik there is an open
meadow. Here the main body of the Kurelu were gathering.
Over one hundred had now appeared, and at a signal a
group of these ran down the field to the reedy pool. On the
far bank a party of Wittaia danced and called. The enemies
shouted insults at each other and brandished spears, but no
arrows flew, and shortly both sides retired to their rear positions. Because the war was to be fought on their common
frontier, the majority of the Kurelu were Kosi-Alua and
Wilihiman-Walalua—the southern Kurelu. The northern
warriors were not obliged to fight, but the best men of even
the most distant villages would appear.
The sun had climbed over the valley, and its light
flashed on breastplates of white shells, on white headdresses,
on ivory boars' tusks inserted through nostrils, on wands of
white egret feathers twirled like batons. The alarums and
excursions fluttered and died while warriors came in across
the fields. The shouted war was increasing in ferocity, and
several men from each side would dance out and feign attacks, whirling and prancing to display their splendor. They
10 •

were jeered and admired by both sides and were not shot
at, for display and panoply were part of war, which was
less war than ceremonial sport, a wild, fierce festival. Territorial conquest was unknown to the akuni; there was
land enough for all, and at the end of the day the warriors would go home across the fields to supper. Should
rain come to chill them, spoil their feathers, both sides
would retire. A day of war was dangerous and splendid,
regardless of its outcome; it was a war of individuals and
gallantry, quite innocent of tactics and cold slaughter. A
single death on either side would mean victory or defeat.
And yet that death—or two or three—was the end purpose
of the war, and the Kurelu, in April, were enraged. Two
moons before, three wives of the Haiman kain Maitmo, with
another woman and a man, had gone off to a pig feast held
by clansmen in a nearby tribe; on their way they had been
killed by the Wittaia, and though the Kurelu had come off
best in the wars since, the score was not yet evened.
Toward midmorning a flurry of arrows was exchanged,
and the armies, each three or four hundred strong, withdrew
once more. But soon a great shout rose up out of the distance, and the Kurelu answered it exultantly, hoo-ah-h, hooah-h, hua, hua, hua, like a pack cry of wild dogs. From the
base of the tree the advance parties ran to the hillock at the
edge of the reed pool, mustered so close that the spears
clashed. More companies came swiftly from the rear positions, bare feet drumming on the grass. Here and there
flashed egret wands, or a ceremonial whisk; the whisk was
made of the great airy feathers of the cassowary bound tight
by yellow fiber of an orchid. The wands and whisks were
waved in the left hand, while the spears were borne at shoulder level in the right. Four men had black plumes of the
saber-tailed bird-of-paradise curling two feet or more above
their heads; at the bases of these plumes shone feathers of
•11

parrots and other brilliant birds, carmine and emerald and
yellow-gold, fixed to a high crown of fur and fiber.
All wore headdresses of war. There were thin white
fiber bands, and broad pandanus bands with the brown,
gray, or yellow fur of cuscus, opossum, and tree kangaroo.
There were crowns of flowers and crowns of feathers, hawk,
egret, parrot, parakeet, and lory. Feather bands were stuck
upon the forehead, black and shiny with smoke and grease,
and matched pairs of large black or white feathers shot
straight forward above the ears. Most common of all was a
white solitary plume, bound to the forehead by its quill.
On the black breasts lay bibs made up of the white faces
of minute snail shells: the largest bibs contained hundreds
of snails. Most of these were fastened to the throat by a collar of white cowrie shells, and some of the men wore, in addition, a section of the huge baler shell, called mikak; this
spoon-shaped piece, eight inches long or more, was worn
with its white concave surface upward, just beneath the
chin. Over the centuries, the shells had come up from the
coast on the obscure mountain trade routes; they were the
prevailing currency of the valley, and a single mikak would
purchase a large pig.
Few of the men were entirely without decoration. Even
the youngest warriors, the long-legged elege of fourteen to
eighteen, wore strings of snails, or a lone feather in the
dense wool of their hair. But here and there were naked
men—naked, that is, but for the basic dress of every day,
worn by all warriors in addition to the shells and fur and
feathers: the tight armlets of the pith of bracken fern,
braided beautifully upon the wrist or just above the elbow;
black fiber strings, one or more, worn at the throat; and the
horim, an elongated gourd worn by all but the smallest
boys upon the penis. The horim is tied in an erect position
by a fine thread of twig fiber secured around the chest; a
12 •

second thread is looped through a small hole in the horim
and down around the scrotum. The horim is often long
enough to extend past its owner's nipples, and is sometimes
curled smartly at the tip; many are decorated with a dangling hank of fur.

The advance warriors swept forward past the pool, reflections writhing on the windless water. The clamor increased as the Wittaia came on to meet them, led by a figure
whose paradise plumes swayed violently above a head from
which white feathers sprayed; he wore a boar's tusk through
his nostrils, hanging down like a white mustache. Both mikak
and shell bib gleamed upon his breast, and staring white
circles were painted around his eyes.
Two armies of four to five hundred each were now opposed, most of the advance warriors armed with bows, a few
with spears. They crouched and feinted, and the first arrows sailed high and lazily against the sky, increasing in
speed as they whistled down and spiked the earth. Shrieks
burst from the Wittaia, and a wounded Kurelu was carried
back, an arrow through his thigh; he stared fearfully, both
hands clenched upon a sapling, as two older men worked at
the arrow and cut it out. Soon a second man returned, astride
the shoulders of a comrade, for this is the way those wounded
• 13

badly are taken from the field. The battle waned, renewed,
and waned again; the fighting was desultory. The day was
hot and humid, and as war demands a great amount of
heroic leaping and running the warriors very much dislike
the heat. But soon the Wittaia began a chanting, heightened
by shrill special wails used little by the Kurelu—
dtchyuh, dtchyuh, dtchyuh—woo-ap, woo-ap
woo-r-d-a, woo-r-d-a—

and the Kurelu ran down the Tokolik to battle, in a flying
avalanche of feet, spears balanced at the right shoulder, tips
angled down. Fighting broke out in the swampy brush toward the Waraba, and, as the line swayed back and forth,
the bush fighters remained where they were, crouched down
in ambush. A Wittaia low behind a bush, thinking himself
unseen, leapt high with a screech as a long spear arched
through the bush and caromed off him; he darted away,
too shaken to retrieve it, for it had nearly run him through.
Now a shout of derision burst from the Kurelu. On the
crest of the Waraba, two hundred yards away, above the
battle ground, thirty-odd warriors stood in silhouette. These
were men of the Huwikiak clans, from a country two hours
distant, on the far side of the Baliem. The territory of the
Wittaia borders on the river, and the Huwikiak are Wittaia
allies. These men had walked far for the fighting. They
streamed down the bank into the swamp to join the battle.
In the early afternoon there came a prolonged lull. The
number of warriors was still increasing on both sides, and
massed legions were spaced back along the Tokolik for
nearly a mile in both directions. Rainstorms, like dirty smoke,
filled the high mountain passes, but the clouds hung back
along the walls. At the edge of the field a young warrior
sighed in agony as an arrow with a long, toothed tip was
worked from his forearm with a bamboo sliver.
14 •

A wind sprang forward from the east, and the sky
darkened. As if caught by the suspense before a rain, the
warriors by the pool grew tense, and a Wittaia whoop, breaking the silence, was hurled back on waves of sound. A harrier
hawk with a black head, coursing the battleground, flared
off and away.
The men assembled in their war parties, and the rear
groups closed behind them. A warrior passing the wounded
boy seized the bloody arrow as it was twisted free and ran
with it toward the front: ordinarily the arrow is kept by the
wounded man, and the old man who had removed it shook
his head, as if shocked by this breach of custom, moving off
toward the rear. The boy, deserted, stood up shakily, staring
at the blood running away between his fingers. At the same
time, he was proud, and the pride showed.
A man without valor is kepu—a worthless man, a manwho-has-not-killed. The kepu men go to the war field with
the rest, but they remain well to the rear. Some howl insults
and brandish weapons from afar, but most are quiet and inobtrusive, content to lend the deadwood of their weapons
to the ranks. The kepu men are never jeered or driven into
battle—no one must fight who does not choose to—but their
position in the tribe may be determined by their comportment on the field. Unless they have strong friends or family,
any wives or pigs they may obtain will be taken from them
by other men, in the confidence that they will not resist; few
kepu men have more than a single wife, and many of them
have none.
A kain with long hair in twisted cordy strings stalked
forward, followed by another whose shoulders were daubed
with yellow clay. U-mue came, in his huge mikak and tall
paradise headdress, black grease gleaming in the hollows
of his collarbones: the miraculous pig grease, blackened by
the ash of grasses, is applied by all warriors whenever it is
• 15

available, for it is sanctified by ceremony and contributes
to morale and health as well as good appearance. It is worn
by most men in their hair and on their foreheads, and sometimes in a broad bold band across the cheekbones and the
nose, but U-mue smears it all over his head and shoulders,
producing a black demonic sheen. He moved separately
from the rest, for he claims to be a solitary fighter, with a
taste for the treacherous warfare of the underbrush. In truth,
he is rarely seen in action, and his claim to five kills is treated
with more courtesy than respect. Among the warriors the
numbers of kills are well established and are an important
measure of degree of kainship.
Despite his claims, U-mue is not thought of as a war
kain: he is the village kain of Wuperainma and the political
kain of the clan Wilil in the southern Kurelu. The positions
of war, village, and political kain are quite separate, though
all may be combined in the same man: Wereklowe, the village kain of Abulopak, is also political and war kain of the
clan Alua, and one of the most powerful men in all the tribe.
Above the kains of all the clans is the great kain Kurelu, and
below them are the lesser and younger men with varying
degrees of kainship, based on property as well as valor,
family as well as worth. U-mue, with four wives and eleven
pigs, is a rich man, and his wealth, in company with his ambition and a rare gift for intrigue, has brought him power.
The fighting was closer and more vicious than that of
the early skirmishes. More than a hundred men were actually
in combat, as opposed to the twenty or thirty who had previously run out in the brief forays: the cries resounded to a
strange, monotonous rhythm of twanged rattan bowstrings.
The lines remained some fifty feet apart, but a few warriors
moved out on the middle ground, crouched low, or down
into the brushy swamp, stalking with spears. This is the dangerous fighting, for few men are killed by the thin bamboo
16 •

arrows. Some may die afterward, but it is the spear which
usually accounts for the rare kills made on the battlefield
itself. The spear fighters in the brush beneath the Waraba
kept low, for an arrow sailed at every upraised head. On the
Tokolik, the battle line wavered back and forth, and at one
point the Kurelu were swept back to the pool. Kurelu himself came forward then, and his men rallied. When the former line had been restored, the old man returned to the rear
companies.
Seated among the taller kains, Kurelu looks shrunken
and obscure. The scars of an ancient fire burn have pinched
his chest, and his dress is old and brown and simple. His
face is intelligent and reflective, almost shy, and its power
is not readily perceived. But Kurelu's gentle smile is private,
and his eyes are cold and deep, like small holes leading to
infinity.
Each little while a wounded man was carried back. One
of these was Ekitamalek of the Kosi-Alua, with an arrow in
the breast. Ekitamalek would die. The battle flew back and
forth until, toward midafternoon, another long lull occurred.
An hour passed, and the warriors of the far villages started
off in single file for home. But on an instant fighting broke
out again. It was led this time by Weaklekek, who was a war
kain of the clan Alua and one of the great warriors: Weaklekek, with his broad brow and mighty grin, was presently
in mild disgrace, having missed a fine chance in the last war
to kill a Wittaia with his spear. As it was, he had found himself cut off and was saved at the last moment only by a
wild foray and flurry of arrows shot by two of his men.
A number of warriors had now been wounded, but no
one had been killed on either side, and the fighting continued
until dusk. The warriors whooped and ducked and came up
grinning in an access of nervous ferocity, much like the boys
with their grass spears on the homeward paths of twilight.
• 17

The four wives owned by U-mue do not all live in
Wuperainma, partly because one or more must tend his pigs
up on the mountain, and partly because Hugunaro and Ekapuwe fill the village with their fighting. In consequence,
Ekapuwe, who is pregnant, has been sent to the pig village
of Lokoparek, while the other three work in their husband's
fields.
U-mue's wives and their small children share two conical huts called ebeais. The ebeai, or woman's round house,
is perhaps ten feet in diameter and eight feet high. The
lower floor is built a foot or so above the ground, and the
sleeping loft about four feet above that: the loft is entered
through a square hole in the ceiling. Both floors are carpeted
with grass straw but are otherwise unfurnished. In the center of the ground floor is a hearth, which is delimited by four
wood uprights at its corners. The uprights, which help support the ceiling, also prevent people from rolling into the
fire: this a common accident among small children, and
many akuni bear the scars of it, including Kurelu himself.
The smoke of the fire must escape through a small doorway
giving on the yard; outside the doorway, under the hanging
fringe of the thatch roof, is a small area where two people,
one on each side, may squat out of the rain.
The ebeais of U-mue's wives are two of five in the long
yard: two others belong to Loliluk, and one to Ekali. Across
from the row of ebeais is the communal cooking house, an
airy rectangular shed with a peaked roof of thatch and several doorways; though only six feet wide, it is over sixty feet
in length, with three supporting posts from ground to ridgepole. The smoke escapes it through doorways, walls, and
18 •

roof, rising with the steam of the wet thatch to mingle with
the ground clouds of early morning.
Hugunaro crossed from her hut at daylight to prepare
her fires. Morning hiperi—hiperi, or sweet potato, is the basic
food, so much so that hiperi nan, the "hiperi-eating," is synonymous with "meal"—are roasted at the fire's edge, and
the children are sent with them eventually to the men's
pilai, a communal hut like a very large ebeai which stands at
the head of the yard, opposite the entrance: the men ordinarily rise later than the women and remain in the pilai by
the hearth until the sun is well up from behind the cliff and
the dank morning chill abated.
Their meal finished, Hugunaro sent her daughter with
the other children to tend the pigs, which dwell in low sheds
divided into separate stalls: the pig sheds may open into the
rear wall of an ebeai, with the nearest stall reserved for piglets or sick animals in need of special care, but in U-mue's
yard the two sheds are separate structures in protected corners, with one end of each facing directly on the yard. Each
yard normally contains one pilai and one cooking shed, five
or six ebeais, and one or more pig sheds, depending on the
prosperity of the inhabitants, all of these facing on a common ground and surrounded by a fence of palings; the village fences, as well as those surrounding outer gardens, are
crested invariably with straw, designed to protect the raw
fence wood from rot. Small plots or borders of tobacco,
sugar cane, gourds, ginger, and other special plants are kept
within the fence, where they may be guarded.
The entire enclosure, with its own entrance from outside, is called a sili. Sometimes an entrance is boarded up
and the fencing between two silis taken down, establishing
a common yard; in this case there are usually two pilais and
two cooking sheds, with a corresponding increase in the
dwellings of pigs and women. A village may be composed
• 19

of one or more silis, depending on its age and its importance,
though there are rarely more than three. Wuperainma, an
important village, can boast four, but one of these is presently abandoned. As is often the case, the fence of the abandoned sili has been maintained, and the grounds have been
turned to small garden plots as well as a grove of banana
trees. Bananas are also grown, sometimes in company with
pandanus, in weedy corners between silis, which tend to be
erratic in their alignment. The warm green of the great
banana fronds, wavering on the colder greens of the midmountain landscape, may signal the presence of a village
even when the gold thatching of the roofs is quite obscured.
The sun had burned away the mists, and the men had
left for the lookout towers to mount guard; Hugunaro, with
the other women living in the sili, went out into the fields.
Aneake, the birdy old mother of U-mue and Yeke Asuk,
usually goes also, but today she remained about the cooking
shed, tending the piglets and the smallest children. Frequently these children accompany their mothers: they sit
astride the women's shoulders, clinging to their hair. Infants
are always borne this way, while new babies are carried in
the bottoms of the nets extending down the mothers' backs:
here in the dark folds, except when taken to the breast, they
ruminate all day.
The nets are a series of overlapping bags, woven from
brown fiber of an aquilaria bush, and decorated usually,
though not always, with V patterns of dark red and purple
dyes. They are attached by a headband at the forehead,
and swing freely down the back, over the hips; a full load
may and often does include a cargo of vegetables at the
shoulder blades, a small pig upside down toward the middle
of the back, and a small baby in the deepest net, jouncing
along on the behind.
Empty or full, the nets are worn at all times by the
20 •

women, though they are not an article of dress. The women's
clothing is a sort of skirt of fiber coils which circles the body
well below the waist; it passes under the bare buttocks,
sweeps upward to cross the hipbones, and dips down again
under the belly in a kind of scanty pelvic apron. The coils
are slung loosely except at the hipbones, where they are
tightly bound together; it is the pressure here which just
maintains an otherwise precarious arrangement. The new
coils may be very pretty, for a gray base of palm fiber is
overlaid with the hard shiny inner bark of two woody ground
orchids, one with red blossoms and red fiber and the other
with purple blossoms and a fiber of bright yellow. The
women's skirts are woven by the men, who are the artisans
of the akuni.
In the morning the nets are empty, swaying gracefully
on the women's backs.
Hugunaro and the others walked in single file down
through a wood of small trees and across the brook and out
through the savanna to the ditches and the sweet-potato
fields. A fairy-wren, a tiny scrap of black with bright white
shoulders, chased another through yellow pastels of rhododendron. Each woman carried her digging stick across her
shoulders and behind her neck, both hands raised to clutch
it. The digging stick—the large oarlike stick used by the
men and the smaller pointed one used by the women—is
the only garden tool of the akuni.
U-mue's fields are far away toward the Tokolik, and the
file of women angled back and forth along the path, which
zigzags out among the ditches; the drainage ditches, which
are crossed by bridges in the form of slim poles, serve also
to deter the pigs from ravaging the gardens. Hugunaro
carried a tight bundle of grass thatch containing fire: the
fires are used throughout the day to burn dried garden trash.
Arriving, she laid this on the ground and built it up with dry
• 21

weeds and vegetable detritus. Each woman then took fire
to the area which she was working.
Hugunaro began immediately, using her digging stick
with sharp backhand strokes, like paddling, to slash the
weeds; later she would break the ground in the same way.
Her digging stick is about five feet long, pointed sharply at
both ends; it is known as the hiperi spear, for it must serve
also as a weapon in the event that the women are attacked.
Though their spears would be no match for those of Wittaia
raiders, the women in concert might defend themselves just
long enough for help to reach them from the kaios.
The smoke rose slowly from the fires, and all across the
gardens, on both sides, small white plumes broke the dark
patterns of the fields. It was midrnorning. In midafternoon
the men would take up their spears and move back toward
the villages, and the women would go too. There were only
two meals in the day, in the morning and the evening, and
the hiperi must now be cooked, for dark would come in a
few hours. The women would take the vegetables harvested
that day and load them into their nets, so that, trudging
homeward, they looked twice the bulk of the skinny creatures who had gone out in the morning.
Hugunaro's figure is typical of the women, who, except
when pregnant, are little fatter than the men. She is perhaps
five feet tall, with small shoulders and full breasts, small
hips, and short, thin, childish legs: these legs, which are
characteristic, seem curiously out of place on female bodies
otherwise well made. She is a pretty woman, with bright
brown eyes and a quick mouth and a wry, strident manner;
in her stridence and quick temper she resembles the pregnant wife, Ekapuwe, which accounts in part for their mutual
ill feeling.
Koalaro is older than the other wives and without fire:
she is of the mood and color of bare earth. The young wife,
22 •

Yuli, has no child as yet, though she looks strong and willing.
She is taller than the rest, high in the breasts and heavy in
the legs and hips, for her labors have not shrunk her to
muscle. Yuli has tight little eyes in a large and stupid face,
and her loose smile is playful. She looks as if she had a secret,
and indeed she may: not long ago she was seized while in
the fields and taken away to their own village by some men
of the Kosi-Alua. After three days she came back of her own
accord, and while it is assumed that she was not raped, and
even that no intercourse took place, U-mue is nonetheless
very angry with the Kosi-Alua and plans revenge.

In the evening fields below the grove of araucaria, a man with a black dog was hunting a tiny quail.
The dog, sharp-eared and bushy-tailed, was quick and small;
it came with the akuni long ago and is peculiar to the highlands.
The man, carrying a throwing stick, followed the dog.
His arm was cocked. There were four boys with him, the
fleet yegerek of seven to fourteen, not yet warriors and no
longer children, the scouts and messengers, the swineherds
and the carriers of weapons; the yegerek were armed with
short sticks of their own. The dog pounced, and a quail flew.
The place was surrounded, and two more quail flew out, the
low sun gleaming through their wings as they whirred down
the savanna. None were struck down, and the group trotted
onward.
The boys soon tired of the hunt. They broke off small
spears of a firm grass and staged a war, dancing and feinting
• 23

with the spears, and whooping, before darting forward to
throw, wrists quick as snakes. In the dusk their thin bodies
were no more than silhouettes, outlined against the distant
hill called Siobara.

The warrior Yeke Asuk of Wuperainma got his
name when still a boy. Yeke Asuk means "Dog Ear" and refers to a gift for overhearing word of any activity which
might lead to trouble, such as raid or pig-theft, and tagging
along behind. Yeke Asuk, volatile and hot-tempered and <i
suiker, has not lost his taste for trouble and is often, these
days, at the root of it. But, as U-mue's younger brother, he
has influence, and he is brave.
Two days before, on the Tokolik, Yeke Asuk had received a scalp wound from an arrow. The wound was superficial and no longer bothered him, and he sat with the other
men around the hearth in U-mue's pilai until the sun was
high over the cliff behind the village. U-mue himself had
been absent since the night before, on a visit to his pregnant
wife up in the mountains.
Each morning, when their sweet potatoes had been
eaten, the men smoked and talked in the dense warmth of
the hut, and performed slow, peaceful work of manufacture
and repair. Several worked together in repairing a shell bib:
the shell strings lay coiled on a large leaf, and next to the
leaf lay a supply of fiber from the spiny bamboo as well as
some soft aquilaria. The aquilaria was woven across strands
of bamboo to make the tough bands on which the rows of
snail shells would be sewn.
24

•

In the sleeping loft above, Ekali turned softly. The ceiling of thin bamboo shafts supported by crossbeams of wood
creaked vaguely with his movements. Soon a leg appeared out of the ceiling hole; it probed blindly for the
wooden step which, polished with long use of callused
feet, gleamed in the pale light through the doorway.
Ekali took a place behind the other men, who squatted
near the door to use the light. At the hearth, as well as in
the loft above, one is closer to the front according to one's
status—in a crowded hut, the kepu men and younger boys
move to the rear. A tall, smiling man with a confident air,
Ekali is kepu, but the others greeted him politely, their soft
voices passing around the circle. Ekali, narak-a-laok, they
said, taking his hand. Narak, narak. From the shed adjoining
came the bumping of U-mue's pigs, the consternation of
each morning's meeting with the children.
Yonokma is an older boy, an elege, sixteen or seventeen;
he took from the wall an arrow shaft of cane and fitted it
with a long tip, but the binding of vine needed repair, and
Yonokma, with the shiftlessness of his age, replaced the arrow without really working on it. As the young brother of
U-mue's wife Koalaro, Yonokma stays frequently in this pilai.
Because his movements are indefinite—he stays as often at
his father's pilai in Abulopak—his name signifies "the Wanderer."
Yonokma's friend Siloba began to sing. Siloba comes from
the village of Mapiatma, on the far side of the wood, but
he usually sleeps in Wuperainma, for U-mue is his nami. All
akuni have namis, or men favorably disposed toward them
in a protective and generous way; the nami is most often
the child's maternal uncle, though the relationship is not automatic, and a boy may have more namis than one. The nami
relationship is the warmest of all family ties. A child will
also have ceremonial fathers—the brothers, often, of his real
• 25

father. Such a father would claim Siloba—An-meke, he
would say, Mine, grasping his horim—with as much authority as Siloba's own parent, and, in fact, the distinction between true and ceremonial is thought quite unimportant—
in a sense, the head of the clan is the father of all in it. The
ceremonial father, like the real one, is apt to be remote and
strict, while the nami is indulgent.
As a house of warriors—in addition to Yeke Asuk, there
are Hanumoak and Loliluk, and the boy Yonokma is already
a fierce fighter—the pilai is stocked heavily with arrows and
bows, with an arsenal of spare bowstrings, bindings, and new
arrow points. The latter objects are wrapped in neat packets
of straw or banana leaves and stored in the rafters or hung
along the walls. Bundles of feathers, packets of fibers, a
gourd calabash containing small fetish objects, a net bag of
tobacco, some stone adzes, a bird-of-paradise headdress belonging to Hanumoak, some spare horims, and a men's digging stick are stacked or hung against the walls toward the
rear. Attached to the fire frame, near the ceiling, are a set of
boar's tusks for the nostrils, a boar's-tusk knife, a cane mouth
harp, and Yeke Asuk's armlets of brown dog fur. By the side
of the fire, which was now reduced to embers, lay long bamboo holders for the tobacco, and a small wooden tongs. The
tobacco, wrapped and smoked in a coarse leaf, is called
hanum; Hanumoak, "Tobacco Bone," is named after the
holder.
The sun had pierced the mist at last and gleamed in the
puddles in the yard. One by one, the men left the dense
warmth of the hut. Taking their spears—the spears are too
long to be brought into the pilai, and are kept outside—they
wandered toward the entrance of the sili.
U-mue's wife Hugunaro, squatting in a doorway of the
cooking shed, watched the departure without interest, for
she watched it every morning of her life. As Siloba slipped
26

past her, Hugunaro hissed at him. Siloba, she said softly. She
beckoned him with the characteristic gesture, arm extended,
palm down, folding her fingers down and back, down and
back. E-me, erne. Come. She handed him a blackened hiperi.
Siloba smiled, a quick, shy smile of thanks.
The warriors went down through the wood and out
across the fields toward U-mue's kaio. The path angled back
and forth among the dark green leaves and violet trumpet
flowers of the sweet potatoes. Every little while it crossed
one of the drainage ditches, from which a coarse calla lily
erected its large stalks; the corm of this lily supplies the vegetable of Oceania known as taro. Beside the taro plant floated
leaves of its wild relative, a small water lily. Orange dragonflies zipped up and down the ditches, clashing in mid-air
with a small dry, harsh electric sound, or poising suddenly
on a leaf, their long transparent wings cocked forward. Like
the drab mountain swiftlet which coursed the air above
them, they were hunting insects.
U-mue had come down from the mountains and was already at the kaio. He wore a new crown of white feathers,
taken from the wing linings of the black duck; the quills had
been punched through a strip of papery pandanus bark to
form a crown. Ordinarily the men do not wear such decorations to the kaio, but the crown was a new one and U-mue
is vain. To go with the crown, he wore his large mikak and
fine shell bib, with a string of cowries hanging down his
back. A fresh band of black grease was drawn across his face,
and his brow was also greased and shiny. Otherwise his dark
skin was clean; he habitually looks cleaner than the other
men, who do not always remove the fine gray scale of their
own grime, nor the mud flecks on their lower legs. With
U-mue was Apeore of Lokoparek, a taut-faced warrior with
cold browless eyes.
The men crept beneath the shelter and hunched around
• 27

the fire. On most days they would have rested here all morning, but today there was men's garden work: though the
women tend the gardens, the men do all the heavy work of
creating and rebuilding fields and ditches.
Soon all but U-mue left the shelter. They had on the
short horims worn at work, and the few wearing shell bibs
turned these around so that they hung down behind. In a
ditch a hundred yards away other men had already collected,
standing in water over their knees. They reached down and
dug double handfuls of mud and threw these up upon the
banks, where older men packed the mud around each hiperi
plant. Soon nearly twenty were splashing in the ditch, heaving and sweating. Hanumoak, who is quick-witted and handsome, paused for a while to daub some gray clay on his
shoulders; he craned his head around, taking pleasure in his
own appearance. The lame man Aloro came along after a
while: he planted his spear butt in the earth and, sidling
clumsily, joined the others in the ditch. Aloro was greeted
with deference, for despite his twisted leg he is a fanatic
warrior; it was Aloro who, with Yeke Asuk, saved the life
of the war kain Weaklekek when the latter was cut off by
the enemy. Though both Aloro and Yeke Asuk are young
warriors, they have each killed two.
Beyond the men rose a pall of women's fires. This morning the women had avoided the garden where the men labored, for though a man works sometimes with his wives,
the two sexes never mix in larger groups. Once in a while
the women, in apparent approval of the spectacle in the
ditch, would laugh loudly among themselves, for in their
cheerful way they are in league against the men.
U-mue climbed slowly and sedately to the top of the
kaio tower and sat himself upon the platform, his feathers
gleaming as he turned his head against the sky. U-mue was
worried about his new crown, for though many of the peo28 •

ple broke the taboo, the use of the wild duck in any way was
considered wisa. Certain plants, animals, acts, localities, and
other phenomena were wisa—invested, that is, with supernatural power. A wisa thing was not necessarily good or bad,
but neither was it to be trifled with without due ceremony.
U-mue knew that the great kain Wereklowe, for one,
had been angered by his use of duck feathers. A man who
touched this bird, according to Wereklowe, lost much of the
keenness of his sight and would thus be unable to spy out
a raiding party of the enemy.

Just south of the village of Homaklep a small

spur of the mountain, in the form of a low wooded ridge,
slides out onto the valley floor and disappears. The village
of Abukumo, half deserted now, lies on this ridge, and below
Abukumo is a small wood. The wood gives on a grassy knoll,
with a small grove of trees shading gray boulders; the knoll is
called Anelarok. Below the south flank of Anelarok flows a
small brushy stream, the Tabara, and to the west lie the open
grasslands and the gardens.
Anelarok lies at a crossing of the paths, and because it
commands a fine view of the valley there are often people,
and a fire. The paths lead from the villages to the Aike, and
from the fields into the mountains; the least-used is the one
which plunges down into the undergrowth of the Tabara,
crosses the stream on large flat stones, and climbs again on
a steep slope toward the land of the Siep-Kosi. This path
was used one afternoon to take a wounded Siep-Kosi home
to his own country.
• 29

In former times the Siep peoples fought separately with
both Wittaia and Kurelu, and though this practice proved
too costly, their warriors still wished to go to war. The
tribe divided into factions, one of which—the Siep-Elortak—
fought henceforth at the side of the Wittaia, and the other
—the Siep-Kosi—at the side of the Kurelu. This warrior had
been wounded in the upper chest, fighting on the Tokolik.
Too seriously hurt to be carried across the hills, he had lain
for many days in Mapiatma. Then one day his people came
for him and took him home.
Two poles were lashed parallel with vines, and the man
was slung between them, supported under the arms and
knees. His body was swathed in leaves and lashed securely;
even his head was covered, leaving him just air enough to
breathe. He was borne by seven men across the fields in
front of Homuak, down through the woods, and up over the
knoll of Anelarok. The journey homeward was a long one,
but the men did not pause at Anelarok to smoke. Some Kurelu were there, and a fire burning, but the Siep-Kosi passed
through quickly. The Kurelu and the Siep-Kosi, enemies in
the past, could readily become enemies again.
The stretcher jolted down across the Tabara and climbed
again on the far side. The paths were steep and rocky and
slippery with the rains, and the seven bearers struggled with
their load. The man sat still as a green mummy, as if he were
long dead. Only once, when the caravan faltered, high on
the far slope, did a slow hand rise toward the green head,
hover a moment, and drop away again. The bearers moved
onward, picking their way toward a sky gray with coming
rain, until the figures were as small as ants hauling a dead
cricket.
The journey was watched from the kaios of the Kurelu.
The men at the kaios knew about the journey, as the akuni
know of all things in their world. An event in the lives of
30 •

the Kurelu is known as fast as a boy can run the ditch logs
with the news, but no boy is ever sent. The word bounds
straight across the fields like the flight of the brown finches,
from village to path to garden—the men's heads turn in the
shadow of the shelters, the women straighten to rest a moment on their sticks—in a series of small whoops as pure and
unmistakable as the flight signals of the birds. The people
know the course of things, for the course of things may be
thousands of years old, and all they really need to hear is
the one word which changes; the event does not. The man's
name is called, with the high whoop which relays it onward.
The wounded man had come of his own accord because
he wished to fight, and he was wounded because he was too
brave or too careless, or because the power held in the holy
stones of his people had not worked for him. This too was
in the course of things. The Kurelu would be sorry if he died,
and they would weep because weeping was expected, but a
large part of the sorrow would be brought about by the satisfaction given the Wittaia. The Wittaia knew about this
warrior, in the same way that they knew about each enemy
struck in the body: they knew his name and village and his
clan, and they hoped that he would die. But it now seemed
that he was going to live, and in a short time they would
know this too.

In the morning, when the sun appeared over the
valley, the warriors trotted along beneath the mountain,
bound for the northern wars. Among those who did not go
• 31

was Yeke Asuk. He was not quite recovered from the head
wound suffered on the Tokolik, and he had private business
to attend to.
Some time ago a man from a village in the northern
Kurelu had trespassed in his gardens. This is a most serious
offense, and Yeke Asuk had stolen three of the man's pigs in
compensation. Two of the pigs had been speedily consumed,
but recently the third had been restolen by its owner.
To redress this outrage, Yeke Asuk traveled to the village to demand the pig's return. He was accompanied by
his friend Tegearek, a violent man who shares with the lama
man Aloro the war leadership of the clan Wilil. The color of
both Yeke Asuk and Tegearek is golden-brown, markedly
lighter than the average though by no means unique, and
as both are also very short and powerful, they made, as they
set off, a distinctive pair.
Yeke Asuk, less than five feet, is probably the shortest
of male akuni. Limo, a kain man of the Kosi-Alua, is among
the tallest. Limo is probably five feet nine, but his small
shoulders and lithe body, more typical than the stumpy
shape of Yeke Asuk and Tegearek, make him appear well
over six feet tall. Many other warriors seem taller than their
height: this is especially true when they are holding, as they
often are, spears three times their own length.
The pig was not returned to Yeke Asuk, and, as circumstances did not encourage either seizure or re-theft, he and
Tegearek went home. The complaint had been registered,
to justify in advance any action that might be taken afterward. There was, in the valley, all the world and time.

32 •

Uwar and Aku came down along the wooded

ridges, carrying on their heads bundles of fagots for the sili
fires. When the steep slope fell away toward Wuperainma,
they rolled the fagots down the hill, and the bundles leapt
and sprang through the green hill shrub, starting the yellow
white-eyes and quick wrens from their low shade.
The children, black motes on the white cumulus, strayed
on the afternoon's high horizon, sad to descend out of the
sky. From where they stood their whole world and their
whole life lay before them, all the northeast corner of the
valley. The Elokera slid away beneath their feet, forsaking
the mountain near the village of Takulovok, which lay invisible under the crest. The river entered a woodland of
albizzia and emerged a slow brown grassland stream, unwinding along the mountain wall. Then it curled off westward, through the Kosi-Alua and the Wittaia, to come to an
end in the smoke-misted distance, the Baliem.
The Baliem lay in the countries of the enemy, and
though it was less than four miles distant, at the far end of
the Siobara, the children would never know more of it than
the fringe of casuarina which hid its waters from their sight.
Above the children's heads three brown hawks circled,
shrieking in tight, ratchety vexation in the high blue day.
Other birds came rarely to the crest, which was no more than
a jagged outcropping of limestone karst, heaved up out of
the sea in other ages. Lichen and bracken ferns clung to
sparse soil, with dwarf shrubbery in the niches, but songbirds rarely paused there; the insects were scarce, and the
dry lizards stayed away. Only the hawks came, riding the
updrafts from the valley warmth, and the fierce blue-gray
• 33

hunter of all continents, the peregrine: the falcon dove down
the steep hill like a shard of falling sky, its passage booming
a half-mile away.
Below the hill, on the south side, was their own village
of Wuperainma; Uwar is the son of Loliluk and Aku the
daughter of U-mue. The children could spy down on the silis
and watch Aku's grandmother, Aneake, pick her way along
the cooking shed. This was the still time of the afternoon,
when all the people were in the fields; Aneake was too old
to work steadily in the fields and rarely left the village now
except to hunch in the near weeds or gather twigs.
They came down slowly, caught in the grave immobility
of time, the sun and grass; the crests of the araucarias which
shaded the spring of Homuak were still far beneath their
feet. Now they could see Abulopak, the bare yards gleaming through the pale green of banana trees, backed up
against the hill's northwestern flank. Between the children
and the villages, the slope was broken by round limestone
sinkholes, and in one of the holes the wall sheltered a grotto;
there was a fireplace, and long ago, before the children had
first gone there, akuni had drawn pictures on the wall. Almost everywhere that people had sheltered beneath a rock
and built a fire, such drawings had been made. They were

34 •

made still, with charcoal sticks, for no other purpose than
the amusement of the artist, for there was no language of
symbol. There were men and women on the soft, pale stone,
and a large crayfish, and some lizards.
The children sprang down the grassy hillside, quick as
black dancers. Their voices called out to the people passing
on the trails below, but the voices came from another world
and went unanswered. Uwar sang vaguely, sadly, without
sadness, and the song wandered on the airs of afternoon.

Early in the morning, when the pigs of U-mue's
sili are herded out into the fields, they are apt to consort
briefly with a herd from the sili adjoining. The animals of
U-mue's sili are tended in rotation by the numerous children,
while those of the sili of Asok-meke are tended invariably
by Asok-meke's stepson, Tukum.
Like all the swineherds in the Kurelu, Tukum conducts
his pigs each morning to a predetermined pasture, usually a
sweet-potato field gone fallow. Here the pigs eat greens and
the stray vegetables which have escaped the harvest, and
root for grubs and mice and frogs and the small skinks alone
o

o

o

old ditches. In the afternoon he escorts them back to village
pens, where they are fed hiperi skins and other offal from
the fires. Each pig is marked almost from birth for a
certain fate—a ceremony, a marriage gift, the payment of a
debt—but until the day of its demise it leads an orderly and
pleasant life, prized and honored on all sides.
Despite the great worth of the pigs and the prestige
they bear, little husbandry is practiced, though piglets, very
• 35

small or ailing, are usually carried in the women's nets and
receive special attention. Should a sow reach breeding age,
she may be escorted to a noted boar, lest one of her own
scraggy kin should work his way with her. The daytime
haunts of these illustrious boars, like the haunts of every animal in the villages, are common knowledge, and, while permission may sometimes be asked of the boar's owner, the
decision is more often left to the stern animal itself.
As Tukum is thought of as incompetent, even for a child
of seven, such a delicate matter as sow-breeding would
probably be left to his mother. Tukum's mother is a shrill,
cheerful woman, the gat-toothed bane of her young son's
existence, who, with her infernal pigs and her incessant
shouting, reduces Tukum almost daily to bitter tears. Not
only is Tukum smaller than the children of U-mue's sili but
his pigs are larger. The pigs take advantage of Tukum's forgetful nature by losing themselves in the low wood or barging into gardens where they do not belong, and as they are far
stronger, better coordinated, more numerous, and more intent than he, they make of his days a series of small emergencies. His only weapon is an extraordinary voice, both
loud and gruff, and hoarse with use, which signals the presence of Tukum and his charges from great distances away.

Ekapuwe lives presently in the hill village of

Lokoparek because she cannot abide Hugunaro. According
to Ekapuwe, her rivalry with and dislike for Hugunaro was
born of U-mue's insane love for Ekapuwe, on the one hand,
and Hugunaro's disgusting jealousy on the other.
36 •

Ekapuwe is a Wittaia woman, married formerly to a
Wittaia. In those days, perhaps seven years ago, the Kurelu
were at war not only with the Wittaia but with those SiepKosi who are their neighbors to the southeast; the region of
the upper slopes where Lokoparek now lies was then wild
forest, a part of the frontier no man's land.
One day Ekapuwe and her husband came to the forest
to gather fiber, and there the beautiful Ekapuwe was spied
by U-mue. It came to U-mue on that instant that he must
have this woman above all things in life; at the same time,
he was not prepared to attack her husband single-handed.
The love-stricken man ran down the mountain to summon
reinforcements, and returned not long thereafter with a wellarmed band. Ekapuwe's husband was driven off, and Ekapuwe herself became the prize of U-mue.
The romantic tale of Ekapuwe and U-mue is anathema
to Hugunaro. Her terrible jealousy, in Ekapuwe's opinion,
makes the idea that U-mue should sleep with other women
unbearable to Hugunaro, and it is for this reason that she
resorts to an abortionist, for otherwise U-mue might neglect
her in time of pregnancy. Hugunaro has made a habit of
having herself aborted, four or five times, it is said. The
abortion is effected by certain skillful women using techniques of pummeling and massage; the fetus is dropped in a
special pool in the small stream called Tabara. Among noted
abortionists is Asok-meke's wife, mother of Tukum the
swineherd. While abortion is more or less accepted among
unmarried girls—as most girls are wed within a year or so
of puberty, the event is rare—it is frowned upon when practiced by married women, and the likelihood is that U-mue
and Hugunaro have quarreled on this account. On the other
hand, the husbands are rather ignorant about abortions;
there is a song of the akuni in which the women gloat over
their husbands' innocence,—but we, the women, know the
• 37

truth! Many women dislike having children, and abortion is
quite common.
It was the passionate Hugunaro who gave her husband
the mildly derisive name that he now bears—the name
U-mue means "the Anxious One." With his intrigues and
maneuverings, U-mue has every reason to be anxious, and a
group of wives which includes, besides the rivals, a big,
sleepy girl like Yuli cannot add very much to the Anxious
One's peace of mind.

When a man enters a sili which is not his own, his
spear is left against a tree outside; otherwise, he rarely goes
without it. The cheerfulness, even gaiety, of the people is
the more remarkable for the fact that never in the whole
course of their lives can they be certain that death does not
await them down the path; after each peril, like the small
mice which dart or flatten in the grass at a hawk's passage,
they continue as though nothing had occurred. Nevertheless,
a man travels armed, not only in the vicinity of the frontiers
but on his home trails; quite apart from the enemy, he may
need his spear in the disputes which occur constantly within
the tribe itself.
One fine day, down by the river, a man of the Kosi-Alua
was badly injured, in part because he had left his spear at
home. The wife of this man had left him for a man of the
Siep-Kosi, and he had reason to believe that her flight had
been assisted by Tegearek of Wuperainma. He came to question Tegearek, who denied all part in it, and when he came
several times again, suggesting by his insistence that Te38 •

gearek had not told him the truth, the latter became woefully annoyed: whether or not the man's suspicion was well
founded, Tegearek felt himself insulted.
One morning the man came to the Aike, accompanied
by several tribesmen; they were bound not for Wuperainma
but for the lands of the Siep-Kosi, to inquire after the missing
wife. The husband, foolishly unarmed, had wandered from
his friends, and near the river he encountered Tegearek.
Tegearek is the young war kain of the Wilil, an innocent
man of violence: his name derives from tege warek, or
"Spear Death." He is strong and stocky, with two black front
teeth and the wistful expression of a man easily confused.
He is hot-tempered in the way confused people often are,
and he had with him Yeke Asuk, whose hot temper is more
complex. These factors, in combination with the fact that
his tormentor was alone and unarmed, persuaded Tegearek
that an attack was timely and, after a brief and violent exchange, he launched it. No cowardice on Tegearek's part
was involved in this, for according to Dani codes a man who
so forgets himself as to run afoul of an antagonist while unarmed and alone deserves no mercy and receives none.
Tegearek did not intend to kill the man but simply to
punish him a little. To this end he jabbed him twice, once
in the thigh and a second time in the head. His victim seized
hold of the spear and tried to wrest it from Tegearek; when
he managed to turn it in Tegearek's direction, he was
speared in the stomach by Yeke Asuk. Yeke Asuk did not
wish to kill him either, and the spear was withdrawn after
having penetrated two or three inches. The two friends left
the man where he lay, not knowing how many Kosi-Alua
might be along, or when they might appear.
The group of Kosi-Alua appeared soon after. They carried their friend home across the open fields, avoiding the
brushy trails under the mountain. The wounded man sat
• 39

astride the shoulders of each friend in turn, supported by
two others at the arms. He was slumped, head hanging, and
his head had been bandaged in vegetable leaves; in the sun,
his back glistened with heavy sweat. The women straightened, watching in silence as the group made its way across
the fields; it entered the brushland west of the dancing-field
called Liberek and disappeared.
Since this episode Tegearek and Yeke Asuk have moved
with caution, for they expect reprisal.

One morning on the way to his kaio, Weaklekek,
the great warrior of the clan Alua, startled a large bird from
the base of a rhododendron. The bird flew to the low limb of
a chestnut tree overlooking the lower Tabara. Weaklekek
took a hunting arrow from the bundle he carried with him
and laid the rest in the grass; he ran silently down a slope on
the far side of the tree, beyond the bird, and crept up on it
through the bushes. The bird sat uneasily on the limb, a soft,
rufous brown bird with a very long, wide tail. It was a mountain pigeon, the call of which, hoo-oik, hoo-oik, hollow and
mournful, is imitated by the warriors in time of war. Weaklekek crept up too close, as he did not wish to waste his
arrow. The bird flew as he raised his bow, and the arrow
skittered across the empty branch.
A man's voice called to him, We-AK-le-kek, a-oo.
Weaklekek went on down toward the Aike, stepping
over a tribe of biting ants which, oblivious of his feet,
dragged a dazed grasshopper across his path and into the
40 •

grass jungle. He was the first man at the kaio. Other men,
bearing their spears, arrived in a few minutes, and Weaklekek left his kaio and went down into the gardens. His wife
Lakaloklek and their daughter Eken were breaking up stale
earth, turning and splitting the old lumps with hiperi spears.
Weaklekek had the men's digging stick, and he set rapidly
to work, panting rhythmically and hoarsely from the start.
Behind him the girl, whose name means "Seed" or "Flower,"
burned the dried weeds, and a light air out of the east carried the smoke toward Weaklekek and shrouded him. With
Lakaloklek, he surged and vanished in the fumes. Feet
planted in the black-brown earth, the man and woman were
the exact color of the soil, as if they had sprung out of the
smoke and earth, like trolls. Weaklekek's great strength and
energy were of the earth, infusing him, as if one day he might
leap free and climb the sky.
Except when in the act of love, in wayside grass or the
night darkness of an ebeai, a man and wife are entirely undemonstrative; this is prudishness, not lack of warmth.
Weaklekek and Lakaloklek are no exception. Nevertheless,
and despite the fact that Weaklekek has other wives, he is
plainly closest to Lakaloklek. Lakaloklek herself, a slim,
spirited woman with a pretty, elfin face, took upon herself
the disapproval of the community by rushing to Weaklekek
immediately after the death of her first husband: her name
means "She Who Would Not Wait." More than any other
man and wife in the southern Kurelu, they seem a pair.
There is an air of strong communion when they are together,
of wild and unarticulated tenderness,
Weaklekek worked relentlessly, his dark body gleaming
in the pall. The dirt flew, tumbling in clods. From one clod
wriggled a bronze ground lizard; it writhed down to the
water of the ditch.
Weaklekek cried gleefully at the sight of it, for the fact
• 41

of it. Some water spiders flew before the falling clods, and
he called out softly, Pilili, pilili—Be quick, be quick. Behind
him, Lakaloklek laughed, as affectionately as wives of the
akuni ever laugh, but she did not cease working. She turned
the earth slowly and steadily, bent over her stick, breasts
swaying.
When Weaklekek first came to live in the southern
Kurelu, he was called simply We-AK, which means "the
Bad One." He brought this name with him from the northern countries, where he had had a wife. One day, not long
before he came to Homaklep, this wife told him that she
had been raped by men of a near village, and Weaklekek
went immediately to confront them. The men were absent,
and Weaklekek, as was his right, seized a number of their
pigs and took them back to his own sili.
The next day his wife confessed to him that she had
not been raped at all; apparently she had lied to him in the
simple hope of making trouble. Weaklekek has a dark temper, and he became enraged. Nevertheless, he retired into
his pilai, attempting to control himself. Some hours later he
emerged and, finding his wife before him in the yard, struck
her a terrible blow along the jaw. She dropped senseless to
the ground, and before the next morning she was dead.
Weaklekek was grief-stricken, for he had loved this
wife; certainly he had not meant to kill her. He could not
forgive himself for what he had done, and meanwhile his
own life was in danger. Custom demanded that she be cremated, but her kinsmen were infuriated by her death and
swore that they would kill Weaklekek; he could scarcely invite them to the funeral. Furthermore, he had no support
from his own people, who were shocked by his act and
would not go near him; they referred to him from that time
forward as the Bad One.
It was characteristic of Weaklekek that he made no at42 •

tempt to excuse himself, to mollify the akuni by inviting
them to feed upon his pigs. On the morning following the
death, when the funeral would ordinarily have occurred,
Weaklekek went out into his yard. In a passion of grief and
anger and remorse, he tore down the fences of his sili. All
alone he hurled the laths together in a mighty pyre, and all
alone he carried forward the body of his wife and laid it on
the flames.
When this stark funeral was finished, Weaklekek left
his village and walked off to the southward. There was no
life left for him where he had lived, and he knew that sooner
or later the kinsmen of his wife would try to kill him. He
went to the village of Homaklep, on the far southern frontier, bringing with him a heavy heart and a bad name.
Homaklep lay in the shadow of the enemy, and its people
were glad to have a man such as Weaklekek, even though he
was an outcast.
Not long thereafter his wife's kinsmen ambushed Weaklekek along a trail. He killed one of her brothers with an arrow, fighting furiously—so furiously that the attack was
never again repeated—but in doing so he worsened his own
reputation. Nevertheless, in his new village he worked hard,
earning respect, and became one of the great warriors of the
region. Over the years, the name We-ak was lengthened to
Weaklekek, to wipe away the sense of it, though the killing
of his wife and her brother have maintained his reputation
for violence.
The akuni still fear Weaklekek on those rare occasions
when he loses his temper, and Weaklekek himself, despite
his generosity and kindness, gives frequent sign that he is a
burdened man. Always solitary, he retreats at times into a
somber silence, as if in dread of his own strength. His broad
back to the world, he hunches over a long shell belt, weaving, weaving.
• 43

Not long ago both wives of a man named Werene
were raped in the fields by men of the Kosi-Alua. Werene
stole two of their pigs, the normal compensation, and gave
them to Weaklekek for safe keeping. But the Kosi men did
not recognize his right, having small respect for Werene.
They came to Homaklep and, failing to find the two animals
in question, made off with Werene's entire herd.
A man suffers offenses according to his inability to defend himself, and Werene suffered both of the most common
ones, which are pig-theft and wife-rape. In principle the
offender is paid back in kind. Should he be found out—and
as these acts are usually an expression of power, he is almost
invariably found out—and should he accept the theft of his
own pigs or the rape of his own wife, the matter is then
closed. But more often the victim of the offense is chosen in
advance for qualities of cowardice or impotence and suffers
his injury to go unpunished.
The great kains, though wealthy in both pigs and
women, are not often sinned against, for it is one of their
prerogatives to kill a man, or his subordinates or children,
when he has done them harm; indeed, the demonstrated
willingness, and even eagerness, to take life is an important
asset in establishing a great kainship in the first place. But
a man who is totally kepu soon loses to stronger men any
pigs he may have acquired, and his wives, when not raped,
are taken outright. This is the law, and, should he resist it,
he may die or be cast out.
Werene's main asset was his friendship with Weaklekek,
who is kain of Werene's village. Weaklekek is a loyal and
generous man, and he heeded Werene's request that he in44 •

tercede. It was arranged that the two original pigs be returned to their first owners, whereupon the pigs of Werene
would be returned to him. This much was accomplished,
but Werene, in the end, had two raped wives without a
compensating increase in the number of his pigs, while
Weaklekek was much resented by the Kosi-Alua.

One night in late April the young warrior Ekitamaiek of the Kosi-Alua died of a wound from a Wittaia arrow; this wound had been suffered in the recent war on the
Tokolik. Ekitamaiek had not been a very good warrior,
spending most of his time in the second line, and he had
been in the second line when the arrow struck him. The arrow entered his breast on the left side, and the shaft broke
off. The old men could not locate the tip and assumed that
only a small piece was still inside, and within a few days
Ekitamaiek was walking around in the village of Kibitsilimo,
where his father, Yoroick, lived. He did not feel well enough
to work, but he was not in pain. One morning two weeks
later he felt strange. He went to his mother's ebeai, complaining of his wound, and was helped into the sleeping quarters in the loft. He started to cry, and the men came to see
him. Within three hours he was dead.
The village of Kibitsilimo lies southwest of Homuak,
across a savanna of abandoned fields and weedy ditches. On
the morning after the death the women on their way to
mourn Ekitamaiek stopped on the banks of a stream just
south of Kibitsilimo and daubed their faces and bodies with
ocher clay. In single file they then resumed their way, yel• 45

low and leprous, bent beneath brown nets of hiperi. From
the river the moaning in the village could be heard, rising
and falling like a dull wind.
Near the outer fences of the village the women paused
in silence while a group of men passed ahead of them. The
women's faces were set and cold, and in the yellow clay they
looked possessed. When the men had gone they moved onward again, into a little grove on the south side of the village. Arriving, they climbed slowly, one by one, through the
narrow entrance stile. Seated facing them, on a high chair
in the hot sun, was Ekitamalek.
The sili is a large one, laid out in an L, with the entrance
at the top of the letter: the chair stood in the long part of
the L, not quite at the angle, looking toward the mountains.
On the right hand of the women entering stood a long
cooking shed, and by its wall the women laid their nets and
offerings of sweet potato. Then they went forward to sink
among the massed brown female backs hunched on the earth
before the chair.
The women rocked and groaned, hands to their faces or
forearms across their brows; some scrambled awkwardly to
touch the dead man's feet and rub his legs. Two women
stood before the chair with leafy branches, brushing the
black flies from the dead man's face and wounds. All the
women cried, and at the same time they moaned in rhythmic
response to the litany of the dead man's father, who stood
behind the chair. Yoroick's voice quavered with grief as he
called out his elegy of his son, in phrases.
The only woman behind the chair was the dead man's
mother. She clung to the chair post, hands clasped around
its top, and sometimes she sank down at its foot, boneless
with grief.
A pathway was kept clear among the ranks of women,
and the incoming men passed through in single file. Kains
46

•

from the nearer villages had brought pigs; those from farther
off had with them ornamented belts of cowries. The animals
were not brought in, but were left in the pig stalls of adjoining silis; the cowrie belts were taken into the men's pilai,
which occupied the corner of the L, beyond the chair.
The visitors were important warriors and men of property; the few young men were relatives, or of the sili. None
of the men had brought their spears or bows, and none wore
ornaments; they were dressed as simply as the dead man
himself. Because of an old quarrel, neither Werene nor
Hanumoak, younger brothers of Yoroick and uncles of the
dead boy, had felt welcome. Among the kains were Nilik of
the Walilo, Polik of the Halluk, and U-mue of the Wilil.
Weaklekek was also there, but he was received coldly by
the Kosi-Alua, owing to his intercession on behalf of Werene,
and left the village before the funeral had begun.
The men paused a few minutes before the body, standing in the pathway among the women: they joined in the
lament, rubbing their right thighs with their right hands and
wiping their eyes with their left. They sniffed and grunted
dutifully, and most, after a few minutes, were able to summon tears: the tears flowed down their faces and mixed with
long strings of untended effluvia from the nostrils. Egh!
Egh! Egh! Egh! After a time this was given up, and the men
moved to a second position, behind the chair. There they
stood quietly, under the harsh gaze of the female body. Most
bent their heads, an appropriate expression on the face, and
one or both arms folded behind the back. The hand behind
Polik's back held the tight brown roll of his tobacco. Then
they retreated from the vicinity of the chair, to join the
other men seated on leaves and ferns in the yard before the
pilai.
The newcomers passed among the rest, taking and
squeezing each hand in turn, with quiet greetings—Narak•

47

a-la-ok . . . Narak . . . Ny-ke.

Narak-a-la-ok,

the basic

form, means "I eat your feces," but it is said in vainglory
rather than deference, as if the speaker, in accomplishing
such an act, could only be quite a fellow.
Close friends and relatives embraced without kissing,
patting each other on the back and murmuring, Wah, wah,
wah, wah, wah, in a kind of rapid panting. The old men,
who are treated generally with great affection, are embraced
more often than other people and at greater length. The
greetings done, the men sat and talked and smoked, joking
quietly and answering casually the cries of Yoroick.
Yoroick is very tall, and he had a small amount of yellow clay stuck on his shoulders. Hands folded across his
lower stomach, he recounted imaginary deeds of the mute
presence in the chair in front of him, in short ascending
phrases: the response of the women began on the high note
and descended softly, like a sigh.
The warriors went to the Tokolik
Ai-i-e-eo

And moved slowly past the ponds.
Ai-i-e-eo

He, all alone, went forward.
Ai-i-e-eo

Now he is gone
E-eo
Our child is dead
And this is very sad.
Our land can be here no more
We will go far away.
Shall we go northward, to the spring of Elesi?
Or south into the Southern Valley?
Shall we go to the peoples in the west,
Or shall we start a new life, far away?
From behind, the chair looked ponderous and out of
48 •

place. The chair had been built especially for the funeral
and while it stood was the only piece of furniture in the
village. Straight-backed as a throne, its seat high off the
ground, it was a makeshift of split laths and saplings lashed
together with lianas. The back and seat were lined with
fronds, and Ekitamalek's body sat in a semi-fetal posture,
legs folded over a lath secured across the front of the rough
chair arms beneath the knees; his knees were at the level of
his chin. His lower legs were bound together with strips of
fiber, and his head was secured to the back of the chair by
another strip passed under the jaw. His hands rested palms
downward on the chair seat.
In a humid heat the dead man sat, attended by the flies
and sun. There grew from him, as the day passed, that infinite silence which, despite its mourners, surrounds a dead
body like a great drop of dew. Strands of his wild crest of
curly hair caught glints of morning light, outlining the head
against the pale straw thatching of the huts. His body was
naked save for its horim, still tied erect, and the black fibers
at the throat, worn by all warriors for good luck in war. His
head was inclined softly to the right and, as the day went
on, appeared to sink gradually toward his breast. His face
looked less martyred than pensive and sad; his mouth, hung
slightly open, was still firm and strong. He looked mortally
tired, and at the same time relieved that he had sunk into
sleep at last. Like most of the men of the Kurelu, he had
been given a second name when his life was well started, in
recognition of a characteristic quality or act or manner. The
name Ekitamalek meant "Empty Fist."
The war kain Husuk, who is the owner of the sili, moved
quietly among the mourners. Black-skinned and straightbacked, with a small step almost delicate and a gently sardonic smile, Husuk attended quietly to the progress of the
ritual. Like most akuni men, he wears a short neat beard the
• 49

whole length of his jaw. In the middle of the day he brought
from the pilai the long shell belts: these are woven belts,
five or six feet in length, to which are sewn large cowries.
The shells are spaced an inch or so apart, and between each
pair is a cross band of bright red or yellow fiber; sometimes
the belt is edged with tiny snails or tufts of fur. The cowrie
belts are a form of currency; as ornament, they are worn
only at birth, at the time of initiation, and in death.
The kains came forward and draped the belts around
the forehead and down across the shoulders of Ekitamalek.
A fine fur headpiece of tree kangaroo was hung on the chair
post above one shoulder, and a mikak shell was fastened at
his throat. On the arms of the chair, as the only offering they
could make, the women draped new nets.
Three young pigs were brought into the sili. Each was
hoisted by two warriors, one holding it by the ears and the
other by the haunches. The pig was held at chest height,
and Yoli, village kain of Hulibara and Yoroick's kinsman,
took up a bow and arrow. The arrow's tip was a half-shaft
of sharp bamboo, sharpened at both edges to the tip; this is
the bleeding arrow, used invariably for killing pigs and as an
auxiliary weapon in the wars. Arm shaking, Yoli hauled upon
the bowstring. From a distance of a few inches, he drove
the arrow into the pig's lungs. The pig writhed, squealing,
to the ground and trotted around the sili, pumping blood.
When it had weakened, it was caught once more, and a man
worked the blood from it with his foot as it gasped upon the
ground. This process was repeated twice.
Banana fronds were brought and stretched on the
ground before the pilai. The three dead pigs were laid there
on their bellies, legs extended forward and back, in a neat
row. Their tails and ears were lopped, to be put aside as
ornaments and fetishes, and leaves were heaped on their
hindquarters. Other men, off to one side, were digging a
50 •

cooking pit with the long digging sticks. The pit, when finished, was three feet deep, and narrow at the bottom, an
inverted cone, and the black mud of its sides and edges was
stamped smooth.
Husuk appeared, bearing a large charred log. Another
log was brought, and a fire built between them. The pigs
were singed upon the flames; they turned a blotchy black
and white as the mud and bristles were scraped free. They
were then returned to the banana fronds, the seared lips
sucked back upon their teeth in a taut snarl. The bright
leaves of a blue-flowered spiderwort had been heaped upon
the fronds, and eight of the elder men, using stone adzes and
bamboo knives, dressed out the pigs and cut them to small
sections.
The fire was enlarged. A man with a heavy ax,
more like a club, from which the stone protruded like a nose,
split long laths; the laths were placed across the two original
logs, and others were tiered above them. Stones were piled
into the fire, and damp leaves heaped upon the flames to
hold the heat. The heavy smoke poured out across the sili,
filming the crouched bodies of the women.
All morning the chanting had continued, but it was gentle now, like the breathing of small waves on a quiet shore:
the old man's scratchy voice was the water sucking back
among the pebbles, and the response was the soft falling
forward of the wave. Tik, tik, tik, tik, tik, tik—aie-ee-o-o.
De-e-o. The dead boy's mother still clung to the chair,
draped down its back like an old net, as if her wrists had
been lashed to the rude post. For the moment she was quiet.
The sun was bright and the air windless; the southeast trades
have not yet come, and in this season the corner of the valley
is all but windless, strangely so, except just before a rain.
Dragonflies and small gaunt wasps and a solitary butterfly,
coal black with white spots on its wings, hovered at the sun• 51

shined mud where the night's rain was fading. High above,
a wind of the upper atmosphere moved clouds out of the
east, and dark small swiftlets hurtled down the sky. Then a
vague breeze turned the air, rattling the fronds of the banana trees which stood in ranks around the village.
A line of men came across the fields, framed by the tattered fronds. At the fences of the sili they passed to the
older men lashed bundles of fresh leaves and ferns, which
were banked into the cooking pit. The hot stones were carried from the fire, one by one, in tongs made from split
staves, as hiperi and pig meat were brought forward. Bound
in a grass cone by a coil of rattan, the leaves and ferns were
piled above the surface of the ground. Vegetables, stones,
and ferns were placed in layers.
Some of the pig meat had been hung on a crossbar between two huts, and more had been stored in the pilai; this
part of the sacramental pig, wam wisa, would be saved for
the next day. The rest was placed in the cooking pit with
the vegetables. A small smiling girl stood near the women,
looking on. In her hand she held a gleaming strip of tripes,
like a toy necklace.
The great war kain Wereklowe came to the funeral late;
he stayed out of sight in a hut near the entrance. Kurelu
himself was there but took no part in the ceremony. For a
while he remained outside the fence entirely, looking obscure and humble in an old brown head net. Later he entered, crossing a back fence, but he sat quietly with some
lesser kains around the corner from and out of sight of the
ominous ranks of women. Sometimes the women much resent the men who call for war and have been known to rush
upon them and beat them severely about the head and
shoulders.
The food baked slowly in the rock fire, and big drops
of rain fell through the sunlight. Small children, bored,
52 •

rubbed flies from the damp of their eyes and nostrils, using
fat spread fingers; they stood framed in the doorways of
the huts, and when they cried were withdrawn into the
shadows. Through big chinks in the back walls of the cooking shed the hiperi fields were visible, rolling away toward
the Baliem River and the valleys which climbed beyond. An
old man tottered about, crying out empty instructions
in a thin, long-range voice; he was gazed at briefly, without
rancor, and then disregarded. Other old men, in a file of
eight, appeared belatedly at the entrance. They came to
stand among the women, as the others had, and paid their
respects to the dead man. Though they wore no decoration,
one old man had dried pig testicles tied above his elbows
as an evidence of wealth. In their honor, the chanting
strengthened briefly, and the new mourners sniffed and
quavered fulsomely in unison.
In the silence of his chair, Ekitamalek became more and
more a presence. While his people, awaiting the cooking
food, sank into a kind of torpor in the rain, he himself appeared to vibrate with a special life, as if the spirit which
possesses all akuni in their lifetimes was only now attempting to escape. Littered though he was with ornament, he
maintained an invincible dignity; with his dark face framed
by the rich belts, he looked more regal and far wiser than
he ever had in his timeless days as boy and man in this same
sili.
Below him the rain and sun gleamed on bare backs and
large mute haunches, which seemed to grow from the earth
on which they crouched. Even his mother, behind the chair,
had sunk away in resignation. One woman still stood before
him, crying soundlessly, with open, untwisted face. This was
the sister of his nami. The nami himself lived far away, but
the sister lived among the Kurelu and represented the nami
at the funeral. While other women came and went, clutch• 53

ing at him, scarcely looking, she had stood there all that day,
gazing straight into his face. The leafy fly switch in her hand
was long since bedraggled, but still she moved it aimlessly,
as if transfixed.
In midafternoon the leaves were taken from the rock
fire, and people stirred. A very old woman in yellow clay
picked her way along the fence as careful as the thinshanked heron picking its way along a ditch. With her small
back and tiny breasts, she looked curiously childlike, shy and
knock-kneed as a little girl. Younger women came and went,
fetching the food; these were big-breasted, with a heavy
stride and a determined air, and many carried babies on
their shoulders, in their bellies, or invisible at the bottoms
of their nets. The women would content themselves with
tubers, for all the pig was taken by the men.
Steadily and softly, like a breathing in deep sleep, the
chanting continued while the people ate. As afternoon
waned, the light rain ceased. The chanting grew once more,
and Yoroick led it, on his knees, tears pouring from his eyes;
his grief, like that of the woman before the chair, was deep
and clear as water of a spring. Yoroick had moved some
years ago from his home village of Abukumo, after a dispute
with his brother Werene; he had taken his three sons with
him, but two of them had now been killed in war. The third,
a young boy, watched him unhappily from the doorway of a
hut. Ekitamalek's young sisters were also in the sili, in their
little girls' rush skirts: their part in the funeral would be
played the following morning, in the ritual mutilation.
While Yoroick grieved, the kains went forward and
stripped the body of its ornaments, and women came to take
away the nets. The offerings, like the grief itself, had been
part ritual; a funeral was an occasion of exchange, and those
who had brought offerings expected something in return.
The cowrie belts were stretched on the banana fronds, and
54 •

the men gazed upon them avidly, oblivious of the denuded
corpse in the chair a few feet away. The Walilo kain Nilik,
hawk-faced and ambitious, held up the shell strands one by
one and announced who would receive them; the strands
were awarded according to the size of the pig brought to
Kibitsilimo that morning, and the former owner of the
strand received that pig. A strand given to old Asisal was
seized violently by another claimant, and Asisal struggled
for it, screeching in dismay. Asisal, a greedy, troublesome
old man, was formerly called Hup, after a bird, because of a
nervous habit of peering about in time of war in search of a
safer position. When at last he was too old to go to war, his
name was changed to Asisal, which means "Extruded Rectum." All the akuni laugh over this name, even chagrined
Siloba, his son, who lives with his nami U-mue in Wuperainma.
But Asisal was in the right and got the belt: the women,
who took the funeral more seriously than the men, groaned
loudly in disapproval at the disturbance. One woman received a strand in the name of the absent nami; this was she
who had stood with the dead man all day, under the sun.
From Ekitamalek's nose black blood began to drip,
more and more rapidly, flowing over his lips and down his
side. Soon men came forward and cut the body free, and a
loud wail arose, the loudest of the day—o-woo-oo—and the
panting egh! egh! egh! of pain. O—woo—oo. The body was
supported from behind as the chair was dismantled around
it; the grieving mother got to her feet to assist in the dismantling.
The body was carried back to the fronds before the
pilai. It had stiffened in its seated position, paper-skinned
from the heat of the sun. The swelling of the wound had
spread all over the left side. A warrior held Ekitamalek from
behind, while two old men kneeled at his side; the mother
• 55

clambered forward, on her knees also, and bent over to embrace his feet, which were pointed in toward each other; for
one instant, in the dramatic light of a sinking sun, she completed stark harmony.
On the site of the dismantled chair a pyre was being
built, a wide, strong tier, left hollow in the middle.
An old man, holding a bamboo sliver, attempted to cut
the arrow tip from the body. Though the arrow had entered
the left side, it had apparently worked upward and cut the
lung; he widened a large incision already made on the upper
breast. The arrow was deep and he could not exract it. Another old man cut farther and at last, by inserting his fingers
into the body, was able to wrench free the wood; it was a
large piece, the length of his hand. This enemy arrow would
be placed with other fetish objects in the recesses of the
pilai.
The withdrawal of the arrow had brought with it a
strong rush of dark dead blood, and with it a stink of putrefaction; the blood drew a cry of anguish from the mother.
She remained kneeling, back to the pyre, as the body was
lifted once again and borne toward the flames. There an old
man held high a banana trunk wrapped in straw; as the
body was carried under it, a warrior shot an arrow into the
bundle. The arrow released the living spirit, which now became the ghost; the ghost would go off into the enemy countries, where, by causing trouble and dissension, it would abet
the cause of its former comrades in the wars to come. The
bundle would be stored with other bundles in a small shelter
in the woods.
Ekitamalek was lowered, face upward, onto the flames.
The fire was very hot, and his bearers were forced to bend
his legs in hastily; even so, one of the legs, from the bent
knee to the foot, protruded from the pyre throughout the
cremation, turning the same blotchy black and white as had
56 •

the pig. Other logs were laid on top of him, and a woman
stoked the fire with a pole when the flames lessened. Smoke
carried the smell of the scorched flesh throughout the sili,
but the chanting had died quickly as the first flames sank,
and the men were talking once again; already women were
leaving the sili, filing out into the twilight fields.
The mother crouched close at the fronds, by the puddles of mixed pig and human blood. Yoroick had disappeared
into the pilai. After a time, all but unnoticed, she crawled
painfully on all fours across the yard toward her ebeai. There
an ancient crone, shrunk up in a tiny bundle like a dead
spider, reached out a feathery hand to her and drew her in.

I n

the gathering darkness, the few yegerek who

had come to the funeral fled homeward, darting and flitting
down the paths and across the precarious log bridges at the
sinkholes and weedy ditches. Pilili, pilili—they called and
regrouped like swift, late-flying birds—selimeke. Hurry,
hurry—the enemy. In a fit of nerves, Tukum the swineherd
stopped to urinate, leaping off into the savanna grass to do
so; he crouched modestly in the grass as the yegerek always
do, even among themselves. The others cried to him, and he
ran after them again, jerking and twisting through the dark
bushes, like a bat.
• 57

On the morning after the funeral the men of
Kibitsilimo, arriving at their kaio, called out to the enemy.
They called the dead man's name, adding a long whoop at
the end so that the name would carry—Ekitamalek, a-oo.
The whooping was answered by the Wittaia passing the
news back through their villages, and the voices rolled across
the valley, hu-a, hu-a, hu—a-oo.
The dead man's ghost, hearing this sound, would stay
in the Wittaia land and work its harm. After a season there,
it would return to the village of the dead man. Ekitamalek's
water calabash would be wrapped in a wisa bundle; the
ghost would remain in the vicinity of the calabash, which
was the last vestige of the dead man.
To lay the ghost, a pig would then be killed and a piece
given to his young brother. The boy would take both calabash and meat to a place near the frontier. There he would
eat the meat and, leaving the calabash under a tree, return.
The ghost, unwilling to leave the calabash, would remain at
this place forever.
The Wittaia knew about the coming of the ghost, but
their joy was stronger than their dread, and they whooped
all that day. In the afternoon several hundred warriors appeared on the Waraba, where their celebration might best
be observed by the Kurelu. Two large groups danced and
stamped upon the ridge, howling and waving spears, while
before them young warriors whirled and pranced with the
white egret wands, erratic as butterflies in the distance.
Soon the Wittaia streamed down the slope onto the Tokolik,
where the performance was repeated. A huge fire had been
built on a ridge in their own lands, and they moved toward
58 •

it; there they danced again. The next day they would stage
the formal victory celebration, called etai.
The skull and large bones of Ekitamalek had not been
consumed in the fire. They lay in the yard where relatives
and friends arriving late from distant villages could mourn
over them. The following day the bones were gathered and
carried outside the village. There they were buried, and a
stick shelter constructed around the place to keep away the
pigs and rats and dogs. On this day too there took place a
mutilation. Though a few older men cut fingers in time of
grief, it is usually the smallest girls who are selected for this
ceremony, and a woman in the valley whose left hand is not
a stump is very rare. On this same day the first two joints of
the two outside fingers were hacked from the left hands of
Ekitamalek's small sisters, in sign of mourning.

• Yeke Asuk and Hanumoak, with their friends
Asukwan of Homaklep and Walimo of Hulibara, are wild
young warriors of the southern villages, moving restlessly
from place to place, seeking diversion and avoiding work
whenever possible. They are irreverent and obscene, though
of the four only Yeke Asuk is noisy. Yeke Asuk, who has been
married more than once, each time quite briefly, is older
than the others and their leader, a squat, powerful, bandylegged warrior and hoarse comic whose voice is recognizable
at any distance. Yeke Asuk is a malcontent, whereas the
other three are only mischievous.
Walimo, Asukwan, and Hanumoak are all three handsome—Asukwan, with a huge head of hair and a bold black
• 59

band of charcoal across his face, and Walimo, languid and
feckless, with faun eyes and the sudden smile of a small
child, and Hanumoak, supercilious as a hawk. Asukwan is a
cautious fighter, though he lingers at war's outskirts, and
Walimo fights erratically, in gallant fits and starts, but Hanumoak, in his casual way, is one of the first warriors of the
Kurelu.
Hanumoak is mercurial, as prone to affectionate silliness as he is to bored disdain. Hanumoak's face is a series of
masks—love, terror, outrage, idiocy, grief—through which
his cool eyes shine. The roles are played in comic exaggeration, and he is truly funny, miming everything taken too
seriously by others; only his sudden moodiness seems real.
At these times he is deep-eyed and silent. But in a moment
his face will begin to twitch as if he were about to throw a
fit, and he will squeal with infectious laughter. The akuni
laugh with him in bewilderment, for they are never sure that
he will not stop laughing suddenly and stare at them.
On the day after the funeral, at the fire site above the
spring at Homuak, Yeke Asuk pretended terror of the dead
man's ghost. An nai-UK, he squealed, biting his knuckle—I
am afraid. The others laughed, but Hanumoak slipped quietly into an impersonation of the dead man in his chair, then
of the ghost itself. Pressing his palms to the sides of his face,
he cocked his ears forward with his thumbs. With his little
fingers he flared his nostrils wide. His eyes he squinched to
wrinkled slits, sewn up by death, and, rolling his tongue, he
pinched its protruding tip between his teeth, at the same
time forcing his head back on his upraised shoulders, like a
man stabbed in the neck. Thus prepared, he tottered forward, blind, on tiptoe, and despite themselves the akuni
drew away from him in alarm. The men grinned nervously
at one another, pointing their fingers at the distorted figure
that had been Hanumoak as if to assure themselves that
60 •

they were not alone with this hallucination; a few, despite
themselves, tapped their horims with their fingertips in awe.
Tukum the swineherd stared wide-eyed from one face to another, and the older boys howled out their fear and laughter.
Hanumoak, who as Yoroick's younger brother is an
uncle of the dead boy, forsook his role as suddenly as he
had begun it and contemplated their simplicity, unsmiling.

Weaklekek of Homaklep had gone to honor
Ekitamalek at his funeral. But Weaklekek felt uncomfortable at Kibitsilimo and left the sili after midday, traveling
homeward over the fields alone. Like all the other men, he
had gone to the funeral unarmed.
Weaklekek's plan was to go to his kaio, on the knoll
above the Aike River known as Puakaloba. But when nearly
there he changed his mind, deciding to pass by way of
Homuak. This decision probably saved his life. The story, as
he pieced it together from signs and footprints the following
morning, was approximately the following.
A band of Wittaia, observing from the ridge called
Turaba that the kaio was deserted, staged an ambush raid
into the territory of the Kurelu. Unlike the wars, with their
fanfare and heroics, the raid has as its sole purpose the stalking and killing of any smaller party or unwary individual.
No distinction is made between man, woman, or child: the
spearing of a little girl or an old woman is ample reason for
a victory singing. The kaios are the consequence of such
raids, for without these sentry towers and the squads of
• 61

armed men which, during the day, are always in the thatched
shelters below, the women working in the fields would be
defenseless.
But today the women were in mourning, and the kaio
at Puakaloba was deserted. The Wittaia descended from the
ridge and crossed the Aike upstream from the kaio, where
the river plunges under a wide bridge of rock. They came
downstream again, to the path which comes to the river
from the villages, and here, in the undergrowth and cane,
they lay in hiding. They could not go farther for fear of being surprised and surrounded; the ambush of a raiding party
is almost as common as the raid itself.
They waited all that day, but no one came. The Aike
frontier is a favorite raiding place of the Wittaia, and the
people, knowing this, take care to avoid it, especially when
there is no guard at Puakaloba. In the late afternoon, for
want of a better plan, the Wittaia attacked the empty sentry
post, putting the shelter to the torch and toppling the watchtower itself. It lay there the next morning, broken in a tangle
of lianas, like a dropped bundle of giant twigs.
Weaklekek, inspecting the ruin of his kaio, knew very
well that, had he come there in the middle of the day before,
he would now be sitting in his own yard at Homaklep, in a
wooden chair.
Puakaloba is spoken of as the kaio of Weaklekek, but in
fact it is the common property and responsibility of those
men living in Homaklep and Wuperainma whose fields and
women it helps to guard. Nevertheless, Weaklekek is the
chief warrior of the kaio and had to see to it that the kaio
was restored as rapidly as possible.
Work on the kaio began almost immediately. Asukwan,
who lives in Weaklekek's pilai, went down to the Aike River,
fifty yards away. He entered the river and angled across the
swollen current which seeped over the banks, shoulder high
62 •

out of the water in the stiff sidestroke of the akuni. On the
far side was a place in the riverain forest where he could
find the long liana used to bind the thin poles of the tower.
In the wood south of Puakaloba, Tegearek and Asokmeke cut the new poles. Asok-meke is head of the warriors'
sili—Tegearek, Siba, Tuesike, Tekman Bio—which adjoins
the sili of U-mue in Wuperainma; it was U-mue who gave
him his strange name, which means "Outsider." For some
reason Asok-meke had not bothered to attend a pig feast
given by U-mue, who dismissed him in anger, saying, He is
not one of us—he is asok-meke. Since then the men of the
two silis have been distant with one another. Asok-meke, a
reflective man of middle years, is the stepfather of the boy
Tukum; at the tip of his horim he wears invariably the great
spiny cocoon of a drab woodland moth.
The hollow tock of the stone adze echoed along the
silent river like the call of a lost bird. On the rise itself, Siba
and Weaklekek dug a new foundation. Aloro the lame man
sat in the shelter, observing: this was not his kaio, and he
took no part in the work.
The spears were leaned against the sides of the shelter,
sharp and clean against a bright blue sky. Some of these, of
a light white wood, were imported from the Yali River tribes
four days to the eastward, but most were of a heavy reddish
myrtle wood, from the eucalyptus-like yoli. Some spears
were eighteen feet in length, with an ornamental sleeve
below the flat, sharpened blade; they were tapered to a dull
point at the butt so that the spear might be stuck into the
ground.
In the corner of the shelter lay the bows and arrows.
The bows are small, about four feet long, scarcely longer
than the arrows, and cut usually from a woodland rhododendron or from laurel. The bowstring is not a string at all but
a flat, hard strip of rattan. It is perhaps a quarter-inch in
• 63

width, too wide to permit the use of arrow notches, and this
factor, in combination with the fact that the arrows are unfeathered, makes the accuracy of men like Aloro the more
remarkable.
The arrows themselves are thin spears of hard cane and
differ chiefly in their heads. For war, the preferred head is a
myrtle shaft, unbarbed, about a foot in length: most of this
length is inserted in the cane, and it is bound at the junction
by fine strands of ground vine. Another arrowhead of war is
notched with one to three files of jagged teeth; its advantage
is that it must be cut out from the flesh. Sometimes the
notches are reversed close to the shaft, so that the arrow
cannot be drawn on through an arm or leg. Both of these
arrows are weakened at the base of the point, to insure that
they will snap off inside the wound, and both are wrapped,
more often than not, with a loose strand of sharp fiber from
the woody ground orchid; when the arrow is withdrawn, the
orchid fiber slides off and remains inside. It is believed to
cause unusual pain and inflammation.
There is also the bleeding arrow, and varieties of hunting arrows, with heavy heads knobbed with two to five
sharp prongs; these are designed for birds and the small
mammals. A few of the cane arrow shafts bear decorative
scratchings, and the wooden points may be engraved with
crude designs cut into them with a mouse tooth: the marks
on certain arrows represent the sole decoration practiced by
the Kurelu.
Asukwan returned from across the river, dragging a
long coil of liana. He had lost his horim in the Aike and for
the rest of the morning kept his back and side to all the
others. Asukwan, who is much admired by the women, is
very conscious of his appearance: without his horim he felt
himself indecent and was very upset and embarrassed.
New poles had been brought and were inserted in the
64 •

hole; the poles were lashed together at intervals of five feet,
or wherever a man standing on the fresh band of liana could
comfortably start the next binding above. Where the poles
began to taper, smaller sticks were inserted down between
them, to build the kaio at a uniform diameter. Moving
slowly up the tower, Tegearek and Weaklekek and Siba, all
powerful men, worked in sure harmony, with neither haste
nor rest; they braced their feet and hauled on the lianas,
leaning out against the dark horizon of the mountain rim,
the hard muscles of their arms and buttocks corded with
effort.
The binding finished, short lengths of stone-hewn board
were passed to Siba, whose husky form, with its tattered
crown of soiled green parrot feathers, gleamed black on the
hard sky of noon. Above his head a goshawk, its reddish
breast washed to pale pink by the sunlight burning through
its wings, circled in tight-brained curiosity.
Siba bound the boards into a sturdy platform, two or
three feet below the sapling tips. White puffs of cumulus,
sailing south on the high winds above the valley, seemed
frozen in the air, while Siba, grinning wildly on his flying
platform, rode northward against the sky.
In the shelter, Aloro played on a small mouth harp. This
sole musical instrument of the akuni is made in two different
keys, one high, one low. A half-section of cane is scraped
out with chips of flint, then polished smooth with a fibrous
grass used as a sandpaper. A reed is cut free down the center
of the section, and a fiber thread attached at the base end.
The mouth harp is vibrated with short tugs of the thread,
the cavern of the player's mouth giving it resonance.
The lame man, playing, stared abstractedly at the fields.
There was no melody, but only a series of rhythmic notes
up and down a foreshortened scale. The frail sound he produced was eerie, scarcely audible in the bright noise of day• 65

light, like an ominous echo from remote regions of his mind.
A few feet behind Aloro, outside the shelter, stood a
small arbor of the horim gourd; stone weights had been attached to the gourds so that this vegetable, shaped naturally
like a water drop or tear, would assume the fine elongate
shape required by the warriors. Beside the frame a boy built
a fire. Into this fire, tied in a small bundle, he placed stalks
of a heavy grass. When this had scorched a little, it was
taken from the fire, and the leaves were strewn in a small
circle on the raw earth around the kaio. This grass is a symbolic offering to the great company of friendly ghosts who
would keep watch with the kaio's men, as sentinels.
Weaklekek now fashioned a toy bow and three arrows
of twigs and sticks. These he inserted among the kaio poles,
about two feet from the ground. The bow and arrows symbolize the area's defense, insuring that any enemy who ventures within sight of the kaio will be struck down.
Finally, all the men who had participated in the rebuilding of the tower underwent a purification ritual.
The new materials of the kaio were considered wisa, and,
until the wisa ban had been removed, the men involved
could not indulge in food or drink, tobacco, or copulation.
Near the center pole of the shelter a tuft of red parrot feather
affixed to a small straw had been stuck into the ground. The
feather was presently taken by Weaklekek and passed back
and forth an inch or so above the hands that had done the
work.
The kaio ceremony is wisa because of the importance
of these towers in the life of the akuni. The kaios must guard
a frontier with the enemy which extends several miles; there
are twelve of them in the southern fields alone, and each of
these may post a guard of four to ten warriors at a time.
Visiting warriors come and go, and the kaio, the great part
of the time, is little more than a kind of outdoor pilai. Here
66 •

the men gather to talk and smoke, to weave shell belts and
mend arrows, while around them the women labor in the
fields. High on the tower at Puakaloba, one of their number
watches for movement in the river forest.
Weaklekek's kaio must guard against any approach by
way of the Turaba; it guards as well a segment of the main
frontier just off to the westward. It is well situated on a high
grassy bank, commanding a view not only of the gardens
but of the low river woods.
At Puakaloba, a few years ago, there took place a great
victory of the Kurelu. From the top of the tower a raiding
party of Wittaia had been observed; the enemy were sneaking through the river woods, intent on a surprise attack
against the outnumbered guard. The men signaled the next
kaio for assistance, and the word was passed along, while
the Wittaia completed a roundabout maneuver. The Wittaia
crept stealthily into the trap, and before they could extricate
themselves five of their warriors had been killed.
Across the Aike is the steep ridge, Turaba, which rises
abruptly just behind the wall of the river forest; the foot of
the Turaba is scarcely two hundred yards from the kaio itself. The ridge is an inhospitable array of limestone, jagged
and tumbled, haired over with low scrub. Because it is uninhabitable, and because of its location, it serves as a natural
barrier in a corner of the valley where lands of the Kurelu,
the Siep peoples, and the Wittaia come together. It is also a
natural path of ambush and surveillance, and, as such, is
generally avoided. On one occasion Weaklekek and a companion went up onto the Turaba to scout, and the other
man, ahead of Weaklekek, was waylaid by hiding enemy.
They killed the man and very nearly caught Weaklekek, who
managed to escape across the river.
Like the hill above Homuak, the Turaba is a salient of
the mountain wall, though it begins but halfway up the wall
• 67

rather than at the crest, and extends much farther outward,
dying at last in forsaken country now thought of as no
man's land. The Turaba, like all the no man's land of the
frontiers, is known as Place of Fear.
Today the Wittaia women could be seen dancing on a
hillcrest to the westward. In the morning the men of Kibitsilimo, going to their kaio, had chanted of the death of Ekitamalek, and the men at the Wittaia kaios had raised a whoop
of triumph. The afternoon the Wittaia came in war regalia
to the Waraba, dancing and singing.
The men in the new kaio watched the enemy without
comment. Ekitamalek was the first man they had lost since
the last full moon, while the Wittaia had lost four; the Kurelu had learned this from a Siep man who was friendly with
both factions of his tribe and had spread the news. The
Wittaia had not announced the names, and, until they did,
no etai could take place. But sooner or later the names would
come, and the Kurelu would hold an etai of their own.

68 •

• In late April the rains had come each afternoon.
The Aike was very high, and the sandpipers which, a few
short weeks before, were common on the river logs and mudbanks, had disappeared.
The Aike in its upper reaches is the southern frontier
of the Kurelu. It slides down off the mountain wall in a steep
narrow rush, only to plunge beneath the rock once more at
the head of the riverain forest. Fifty yards below it bursts
forth once again, forming a pool already as wide as the river
will become. Less than a quarter-mile beyond, it passes the
kaio at Puakaloba, and a mile below this point disappears
into the lands of the Wittaia.
Unlike the Wittaia, who build villages on the Aike, and
who have spanned it with rickety pole bridges, the Kurelu
go near the river seldom. They can swim the Aike if they
have to, but their solitary bridge, built downriver close to
the frontier, is sagging with disuse. No native boats are
known in the Baliem, and the Kurelu lack even the crude
rafts used by most other tribes; they cannot travel safely on
the river and have nothing on the farther side but the Place
of Fear.
Nor does the river bring them food. The Baliem system,
if and when it formed a lake, lacked native fishes, and its
present gorge at the south end of the valley has prevented
the passage into the mountains of fish from the southern
marshes. The valley is without fish of any kind, and the one
valuable creature found in all its waters can be taken more
easily and safely in the streams. This is a fresh-water crayfish, which in the small streams attains a length of four or
five inches: the boys feel for it with their toes, walking the
mud.
Of the three terrains open to the akuni—the valley plain
• 69

which they have farmed, the cloud forest rising behind
them, and the river forests on their southern border—it is
the latter where they feel least at home. Sometimes they go
down to the Aike for a drink, or to gather lianas and certain
woods, but otherwise the river is avoided. It lies too near
the Turaba, and the natural bridge where the river roars
underground, overhung by jungle trees and dark, dripping
limestone grottoes, is considered a place of ghosts. This is a
dank world of air plants, crowding for space on every limb,
of myrmecodias with their colonies of ants, of fleshy orchids
and pale-bellied ferns. Below, in the clefts and shadows, the
fungi thrive in the slow seepings, clematis trails across the
rocks, and miniature begonias, white and pink, flower in
secret in the rotting shades. In the motionless air, only the
silent woodland butterfly takes wing, skipping its delicate
trail of filtered sunspots. The insects of the rain forest gnaw
stealthily under leaves and behind wood, the huge horned
beetles and great papery cicadas, the armored millipedes
and dusty moths, and the spined crab spiders. In the earth
beneath the insects and the spiders, its soft body protected
by the detritus of the forest floor, there stirs an earthworm
four feet long. The skinks, so common in the sun, are missing
in the shadows. In the crevice of the grotto rock is wedged
the skeleton of a dead dog.
This forest is not silent. Honey eaters come and go with
chortlings and shrieks, and a flock of parrots, gold and red
and black, and the tiny brilliant myzomela. The parrots and
parakeets scour the canopies of the river forest and the forest of the upper slope and rim; they are seen in the valley's
open air but fleetingly, in high, swift flocks, at dawn. They
shatter the dank air with their screeching and vanish into
the mountain mist which seeps each morning down the
ridge, thinned out by the pale, cataracted eye of the climbing sun.
70 •

Tukum the swineherd, elf-faced and pot-bellied,
shouted gruffly at his pigs while his mother shouted at him.
He was followed on his way not only by pigs but by small
girls and women; they went along through the low wood to
the fields in front of Homuak.
Tukum's horim is forever askew, tucked sideways under
his belly; there is straw in his hair and gray dust on his skin.
He marched along, a half-hiperi in his hand, and now and
again he stifled his own growling by plunging his round face
into it.
Tukum hated pigs, and though he tended them nearly
every day, the very idea made his huge eyes overflow. At
these moments he looked more like an elf than ever. Tukum
is nearly four feet tall and looks, not full grown, but complete. In his way, Tukum is spiritual; his natural haunt is
not the pigsty but the toadstool. Tukum, with his wild
brown eyes and portly evanescence, does not belong among
the flies and swine, nor even in the sun, but in the ferny
glades of distant woods.

In the night before a sunny day of May, in the
hill village of Lokoparek, Ekapuwe had a child, a little girl.
The birth was a simple one, assisted only by an older woman
of the village. Ekapuwe took the baby in her stride and by
midmorning was sitting up in her ebeai, smoking tobacco
• 71

in her long holder and chattering with her usual goodhumored petulance.
On the occasion of a birth the child's nami usually
comes and wraps a ceremonial cowrie belt about its head.
But Lokoparek is a long way up the hill, and girl children
are not important, and for one reason or another—the akuni
are often informal about minor ceremonials and waive them
readily when it is expedient—this little girl was suffered to
embark upon her life without a shell belt. She will pass a
week or two in the darkness of the ebeai, after which she will
take up a residence of indefinite length at the bottom of
Ekapuwe's nets.
The new baby was U-mue's third girl child—he has no
son as yet—but even so he was anxious and solicitous and
gave a great many senseless orders, interspersed with fits of
shouting. U-mue dearly loves a drama, the more tempestuous the better; the joy he takes in the passions of the mind
is childlike in its abandon. Wracked with grief or rent by
rage—it is all one to him, he is in his element.
I will go off into the mountains, U-mue cries, striking a
pose, Never to return again—and his quick, sly face collapses
in comic grief. For he enjoys himself hugely at these moments, though he tries heroically to muster tears, eked out
with dreadful sounds, part grief, part laughter. When outrageous, he caws and swirls like a bird of paradise, but in
his way he is a kindly man; he is often with his small Nylare,
walking and talking, holding her hand. Like most of the
men, he treats his little girls with the same gentleness that
boys receive only from their namis.
U-mue is both charlatan and buffoon, but he is intelligent, perhaps the most intelligent of all the akuni, a statesman and deft intriguer who, for all his frailties, is a true
leader, demanding and receiving strict obedience from his
72 •

people. The people respect U-mue's intelligence, his pride
in and exhaustive knowledge of akuni ways, akuni ceremonials and family lines. U-mue has whimsy in his face; he
seems to be laughing, from time to time, at insights that his
people will not ever understand, but this laughter is veiled
and rueful, as if he did not know the source of it himself.

• The time of dawn and the first sun is called the
morning-of-bird-voices, and is quite distinct from the ordinary morning, which comes later. Today a pigeon called in
the high araucaria all through the morning-of-bird-voices,
and the warriors, as if stimulated by this sound, went to war
when morning came. The great war kain Wereklowe strode
out toward the frontier, and behind him trotted Yeke Asuk,
decked out in fierce red clay. The armies would take some
time to form, and in the next hours, as the sun gained
strength, a silence lay upon the fields. Only the black robin
chat sang its sweet liquid song: this bird appears to have an
affinity for war, for it perches commonly on the tips of spears
implanted on the ground, or on the tops of kaios, and sings
even in the midday hours, at the outskirts of a battle.
The older men moved gradually toward the Tokolik.
Embracing, two bony elders stood together in the greenpurple leaves, gazing outward at the Waraba. Few Wittaia
had appeared on the far crest, and there now seemed doubt
that there would be a war.
An hour more passed by as tension slackened, and the
enemy did not appear. The kains returned across the fields
• 73

and gathered at a fire in the araucaria grove. This fire site, on
a ledge of needles under a deep bank of fern, is often used
for councils, for it lies between the two main groups of
southern villages, overlooking the cool spring of Homuak. In
a hollow trunk above the ledge dried graybeard lichen,
which tatters the araucaria, is stored as tinder, and with it a
small bundle of long tobacco pipes.
Several warriors and yegerek loitered in attendance, but
Wereklowe himself clambered up onto the slope above to
gather dry sticks and grass: this is partly because Wereklowe
cannot contain his energy and must see to it personally that
all matters proceed as rapidly as possible. But it is also true
of the great kains that nobody is asked to do what they will
not do or have not often done themselves, whether going to
the fore in battle or picking lice from a child's head.
The men talked quietly and quickly in their low sweet
voices: every little while one would reach forward and place
a twig or fagot in the flame, the hand seeming to know by
instinct just where the twig should lie. The fire neither grew
nor faltered, They moistened the dried lisanika leaves for
their tobacco and talked and talked, for it is at these fires
that news is passed and war discussed and the affairs of the
valley regulated. The sound of smoking—a soft, implosive
phoot made by pressing the tongue to the roof of the mouth
as the smoke is taken in—was a rhythm of the conversation,
which was gentle and deferential, little more than a murmur, and at the same time rapid and intense.
Limo, the tall war kain of the Alua, ground his teeth in
a loud, ruminative manner. All men of the akuni grind their
teeth habitually, in pauses between speech, but few as powerfully and rhythmically as Limo. Also expert are the young
warriors Huonke and Asukwan; these men are audible at
thirty feet. Loud Huonke with his hard, furtive face was
present at the outskirts of the kains, his expression insolent
74 •

and cornered; Huonke has never killed an enemy warrior,
though he once took the life of a woman of the Siep-Elortak
found wandering near the frontier.
Wereklowe and U-mue led the talking, and once the
other men rapped their horims with their fingernails in a
fast staccato racketing, saying u-yuh in quiet exclamation,
and a soft, explosive f-whe-oosh. The horim is invariably
tapped at moments of astonishment or awe, and when a
number of men are astonished all at once a sound rises like a
gust of chattering finches in tall dry stalks of cane.
At the edge of the circle the men and boys squatted in
silence; though some were kepu, they were neither disregarded nor dismissed. With few exceptions, the kains do not
brandish power or maintain distinctions of a social kind
between their akuni and themselves. Any strange boy or
halt old man, except in the most urgent councils, may sit at
the side of Kurelu himself, or Wereklowe or Nilik, and may
even have his head picked by his betters. Generosity and
simplicity of manner are marks of the great kain and are regarded as such by one and all. Of the chief kains among the
Kurelu, only Maitmo of the Haiman clan, north of the Elokera, keeps his people at a distance; he is a small belligerent
man, with a shrill, distempered voice when he is angry, and
the awe in which all kains are held is in this case tinged by
fear. While Nilik of the Walilo is also fierce, and Wereklowe
and Polik indulge fits of violence, these men do not abuse
their power; the young war kains Husuk and Weaklekek,
like Kurelu himself, are almost invariably soft-spoken. Kurelu listens and listens, watching, watching, and, though he
is a harmless-looking man, he is the most powerful of all.
The Kurelu, perhaps twelve years ago, were split into
two warring tribes, separated roughly by the Elokera River.
In those days the north was already led by Kut-ilu, the Wise
Egret. His name, from which was taken the name of the
• 75

eventual alliance, referred not only to his intelligence but to
the light color of his skin. In those days too the southern
Kurelu were allied with the Wittaia: the patterns of old
ditches rolling beneath wild grass, with the banana trees of
abandoned villages now grown up in woods, are skeletons of
distant days when the area of the Waraba was not a Place of
Fear but peaceful garden.
Thus the alliances in the northeastern valley are transient and uneasy, and it is never certain from one season to
the next which group will represent the enemy: a child protected fiercely as a member of one's own people may become
an enemy overnight, to be killed on sight, without ever being old enough to know the difference. In the Kurelu, though
many clans have intermingled in the villages and are well
represented north and south of the Elokera, the bad feeling
between the groups persists, and men fleeing the wrath of
one side may still find sanctuary in the other. Weaklekek and
the cold-eyed warrior Apeore are among many who have
taken refuge in the south, where their respective clans—
Alua and Wilil—are more strongly represented.
A feud, which could occur at any time, is feared by the
great kains, for it could lead not only to a weakening of the
alliance against the Wittaia but to a merciless civil war,
fanned by old grudges. Those most likely to cause trouble
are Maitmo and Amoli, war kains of the clan Haiman, who
go out of their way to take offense.
The Haiman kain Amoli, whose village of Hulainmo
lies just across the Elokera, shares with Weaklekek the
reputation of hunuk palin, which refers to fits of manic
bravery in battle, joined with a capacity, when in temper,
to take life among one's own people. Hunuk palin men, few
in number, are very well known and are treated prudently;
in the southern Kurelu, besides Weaklekek, the hunuk palin
are Apeore, Polik, Tegearek, Limo, Asikanalek, and Husuk.
76 •

Asikanalek and Husuk are both warm, quiet men, and their
reputation as hunuk palin is as surprising as the exclusion
from this category of a fanatic warrior like Aloro.
All of these men but one are war kains, and most lead
their own villages. Even Tegearek, though young and without great wealth, shares with Aloro the war leadership of the
southern Wilil, due to a reluctance to fulfill this role on the
part of U-mue.
The exception is Apeore, who is an exception in many
ways. Of the best Wilil warriors, only Aloro and Apeore do
not live in Wuperainma. Aloro lives in Abulopak, which was
formerly the central village of the Wilil and where his father
still maintains a sili, but Apeore has withdrawn to Lokoparek, under the mountain wall; he has no family, for his
only wife was stolen by the Wittaia. Unlike Ekali and
U-mue, who go to Lokoparek to see to their pigs, Apeore
remains there. He is slashing a field out of high forest to the
southward and works relentlessly, day in, day out, like a
man possessed.
No other man resembles Apeore, who is yellow mongol
in his color, whose forehead slants back to a scalp drawn
tight beneath a head net so that his skin seems stretched,
whose browless eyes are flat and cold in a face as hairless as
a skull. Apeore's skin gleams with fresh grease, and his
muscles slide powerfully beneath it.
Apeore is seen rarely at the kaios, and he is rarely seen
at war. When he comes, he comes to fight. His legs are
painted with gray clay, and he appears suddenly out of nowhere, stalking quietly, alone, at the edge of the underbrush
near the front line. Apeore fled long ago from the northern
Kurelu, and his full name, Apearole, which commemorates
the murder by the northerners of his best friend, means
"Killed by Strangling."
• 77

In the middle of the day the yegerek Supuk and
Tukum, Uwar and Kabilek, were gathering firewood by the
small stream which flows in front of Abulopak. The air was
gold and humid, and the three kites which haunt the crest
of the ridge above jeered at each other in the heat. By Abulopak a small myrtle tree had come into pink flower, and the
finches with their black heads and blue bills droned like fat
bees in the high brakes of cane.
Supuk climbed into an oak to knock down old dead
limbs. One limb, breaking open on the ground, revealed a
tiny twilight bat, torpid with sleep, and a hidden clutch of
large white snake eggs, thirty-five or more. Some of the
snakes had already hatched and gone, making their way
down the great tree on its rough bark, but most of the eggs
were still intact, and a few were hatching in slow reptilian
silence in the moment that the limb had struck the ground.
In the slime upon the eggs, the thin dark baby snakes lay
like dead nerves.
Snakes are not common in the valley, owing perhaps to
the numbers of foraging pigs. A small bronze-colored skink
is plentiful, as are tree frogs and a large tree lizard, but there
are no salamanders, toads, or turtles. No reptile or amphibian
is used for any purpose by the akuni, though many insects
and any sort of bird or mammal, including rats and cormorants, are eaten cheerfully.
The yegerek are afraid of snakes and left the broken
egg mass where it lay. The insect bat is smaller than a mouse,
but it is good to eat, and they wrapped it neatly in a leaf and
took it with them.
Running home by way of Homuak, Tukum stubbed his
78 •

toe upon a root. Tukum is at odds with his own reflexes and
is constantly stubbing his toe or stepping on bees; when he
shows someone something he has found, he is apt to open
the wrong hand in his excitement, permitting the escape of
a huge cicada, or a beautiful hesperid moth with a scarlet
silken head, or one of the lovely tropic butterflies with bright
metallic wings, or some other, earlier prize he had forgotten
that he had.
Discomfited, Tukum growls in his deep voice, talking
fiercely in a series of sharp breaths, his large eyes flashing.
He lives in a state of perpetual astonishment, and his words
come in gasps, so that, when excited, he sounds like a small
bellows.
Mel . . . mel . . . mel, he stammers. Mel is an interjection, uttered as a stopgap while the correct answer to a
question is being considered. Tukum rarely arrives at the
right answer, and at the end of a long series of mels, he usually says his favorite word, welegat. Welegat means "any
old thing," or "just for the hell of it," or "how should I
know?"
When his injured toe permitted him to walk, Tukum
marched straight out to the fields and plucked a long blade
of grass; bringing it back to the offending root, he tied it
there in a sort of forlorn bow, to indicate to other passers-by
that a dangerous root existed.

Some time ago the men of Amoli's village on the
north bank of the Elokera accused U-mue of having stolen
and eaten a pig. Though pig-stealing is a time-honored prac-

• 79

tice among the akuni and is not considered shameful, one
must make compensation if one is caught. U-mue protested
that he had not taken the pig, but he was not believed, and,
as he has a strong dislike for violence, he relinquished an
animal of his own.
In recent days U-mue has decided that the theft had
been committed by the Wittaia, and early one morning he
set off, accompanied by Yeke Asuk and Hanumoak, to request the return of his pig. His request was refused. In the
next hours, however, a pig was removed from the environs
of the village, and the identity of the thief was common
knowledge, as it often is, within hours. The thief was Yeke
Asuk, assisted, in all likelihood, by his friend Hanumoak.
A raid on the Wittaia took place on the following day,
in revenge for the death of Ekitamalek. Warriors from Wuperainma went along, but as Amoli's men went also, Yeke
Asuk and Hanumoak remained at home.

80 •

When the sun was high, a party of men under the
leadership of Nilik, kain of the Walilo, went west quickly
and quietly to the albizzia forest in the country of the KosiAlua. From there they moved toward the north side of the
Waraba, slipping through low woodland. From the wood
they crept down along the banks of a small stream which
flows between the Waraba and the Siobara. They were
nearly a hundred, including Husuk and his men and a band
of Wilil under the leadership of Tegearek. Siba was there,
and Tuesike, reserved and quiet, and Aloro, the lame man.
Sometimes their women weep when the raiders go, for
the raid is very dangerous, and on hearing the women, the
men may sing this song:
See, we will set an ambush in the gardens of the Wittaia,
But we are afraid,
For if caught, we shall be killed.
The raiders slipped through the brush and sedge grass,
crossing the deep sloughs of the April rains in water to their
chests. A Wittaia lookout outlined on the crest of the Siobara
failed to see them, for they kept close to the bottom of the
hill, and they were hidden as well from the sentries on the
grassy ridge off to the southward.
It was a quiet morning, overcast. The Kurelu women
worked stolidly in the fields, and sentries climbed into the
kaios. In the woods of Homuak a dove called dolefully. Dull
light reflected from the smoke of fires, from the leaden water
of the ditches, from the banks of white quartz sand on the
hills of the Wittaia. On the savanna between the gardens
and Homuak the yegerek fought noisily with spears of grass,
• 81

but the men were nowhere to be seen. Two egrets which
frequent the Place of Fear sat still as white flowers in the
distance, just west of a tall bush which, in the few days past,
had burst into orange flame.
In the early afternoon the Kurelu crossed the frontier
of the Wittaia. The main party had been left in hiding in
the wood by the Waraba, while thirty or more young warriors led by Tegearek crept forward. They were stalking a
kaio and the surrounding fields of a village south of the
Siobara.
There was a sentry in the kaio tower; he did not see the
attackers until they were at the field edge. There were no
warriors in the shelter, and but a solitary man, named Huwai,
working in the gardens. The man on the kaio scrambled
down and fled, shouting the alarm. Huwai was not fast
enough. The war party surged out of the brush and rushed
upon him; he was run down and speared to death by the
wild-faced, shaggy-haired son of the war kain Wereklowe.
The raiding party returned quickly through the woods
and climbed onto the rocks of the Waraba. There they were
joined by the others, and the rest of the Kurelu came forward from the kaios, prepared for war.
The Wittaia came quickly, shouting out their rage, and
challenged the Kurelu to a battle on a grassy meadow just
below the Waraba and to the south of it. Though badly outnumbered, this advance party of the Wittaia fought with
ferocity and drove the Kurelu back among the rocks; a man
of the Kosi-Alua was speared through the calf, and Tuesike
of Wuperainma caught an arrow in the stomach, just one
inch to the right side of his navel. The Wittaia moved into
the rocks of the Siobara, awaiting reinforcements, while the
Kurelu perched on the gray boulders which lie tumbled along
the crest of the Waraba. The spears of both sides wavered
on the sky like spines.
82 •

Tuesike was carried back on the powerful shoulders of
Siba and put down in the shelter of some bushes on the north
flank of the ridge. He was in terrible pain and in a little while
passed into a state of shock. Siba supported him from behind,
grasping his hair to hold his head upright. Tuesike's horim
was gone, and his blood ran down his stomach onto the grass.
The wound was not bleeding badly, for the arrow shaft had
broken off inside, and the point was in too far to be withdrawn on the field. Tuesike panted tightly, harshly, as his
brown face, draining, turned to gray. He was half conscious,
and the others stared at him like awed children who have
hurt one of their friends by accident. Tuesike, whose name
means "Bird Bow," closed his eyes.
The Wittaia continued to gather on the Siobara and in
an open area between the Waraba and the kaio near which
Huwai had been killed. There a grass fire had been lit to
burn away his blood. Wereklowe and other kains sat on the
highest rock, observing, and now the Wittaia called out to
the Kurelu across the way, confirming that Huwai had died.
At this the Kurelu raised a shout, rushing forward to mass in
a large body at the west end of the ridge. Some went farther,
down onto the middle ground, and danced and shouted insults at the enemy. The Kurelu wanted war, but, strangely,
the Wittaia now refused it. They sat in dead silence on the
rocks and would not take up the challenge. Opposite, on the
knolls and boulders of the Waraba, the Kurelu awaited them.
The Waraba, shaped in an L, is a rock garden of strewn
boulders, set about with ferns and orchids and shining islets
of wild sugar cane. Old gardens dance in the wild flowering below its flanks, for in the corner of the L, in years of
peace, had been a village; banana fronds gleam in the low
forest, a sparkling varnished gleam which turns to silver in
the western light.
The horizon beyond is a dark mid-mountain landscape,
• 83

dark with cloud shadows, distant thunderheads, dense tropic
greens of montane forest, high black walls. But the darkness
is muted by the soft colors of the gardens, by the green
velvet of low marshy swales. The gold grass of the old fields
draws the light, and rays of white break the green weight
of the distances—a sprinkling of vivid whites, like snow
patches. In the dawn of certain days true snow is visible, a
scraggy outcropping near the peak of Arolik at fifteen thousand feet; for a few moments, on these days, the peak casts
back the clouds. Soft white smoke rolls from the garden fires,
soft as the mists on the horizons of far rains. And there are
the blaze of sands on the flanks of Siobara, the alabaster
statues of egrets, the shower of rhododendron. . . .
The Wittaia rose out of their silence, filed away.
At this the shouting was renewed, more strongly than
before. The wild dancing of etai began, a whirling and prancing in which the men leapt high in the air or in a circle, driving both heels against the ground, or performed an odd
taunting shuffle in which the feet are still, the knees pushed
in and out, the hips and shoulders cocked in turn, and the
arms darted snakily forward; the effect is one of lewd, jeering enticement, though it is a joyful dance, performed out of
the wild high spirits brought about by a death among the
enemy and the knowledge that no further risk will come
that day.
Only the Aloros and a few others enjoy the risk, though
all enjoy the war. At the first shout Aloro, alone among the
warriors around Tuesike, had seized his bow and hobbled
desperately toward a battle not destined to take place.
In a forest of spears the Kurelu were streaming back
along the ridge, their stamping thunderous, their voices soaring. O-o-A-i-i-A-y-y—WU! O-o-A-i-i-O-o—WAH! Other
voices, in simultaneous high counterpoint, howled, WUA,
WUA, WUA! The egret wands and whisks of cassowary
84 •

twirled like bright maddened insects, and the white of
plumes and shells and boars' tusks flashed in the surging
brown. At the edges of the tide ran yegerek, setting fire with
thatch torches to the grass tops. Here and there bobbed a
spot of brilliant red—the feathers of a parakeet, or a crown
of the red ginger flower. These colors spun, and the weathered grays and greens of the ancient land lay still.
There came a shout, and Weaklekek with two of his
men ran from the Waraba. They crossed the swamp and
plunged through the reeds on the far side of the Tokolik,
sprinting across the field toward Puakaloba. Once again the
Wittaia had set fire to the shelter, which was burning fast.
Apparently the enemy had been scared off, for the kaio itself
still stood.
The warriors stopped to dance again. Some of them
charged in a great circle, while others swayed ana shimmied,
way-o-way-y—YO, lay-o-lay-y—AH! to an answering din of
hootings and wild high shrieks. In the middle of one group
U-mue, resplendent in his clean bright ornaments of white,
stood looking off into the distance, leaning on his spear, for
he keeps his own counsel even in time of celebration.
A few women had collected from the fields, and these
had begun their own slow sensual dropping of alternate
knees, a swaying of the shoulders, while their arms shivered
in and out, palms upward. One tall woman danced alone,
far out in front of the rest, wearing a mikak shell above her
breasts; in her splendor, she dominated a grassy hillside between the men and the women. This was the wife of Wereklowe's son, who had killed Huwai. Wereklowe came and
danced beside her, but in a little while he went away again,
and she swayed on, as if rooted to the landscape.
Soon the warriors ran down the slope, passing the bushes
where Tuesike sat upon the ground and moving into the
swamp of brush and sedge grass which separates the Waraba
• 85

from the Tokolik. At the Tokolik they assembled to dance
again, before moving on to the etai field called Liberek.
Tuesike was lifted painfully onto a stretcher. Siba and
Asok-meke and Tegearek—the men of his pilai—were helped
by a few elege like Siloba and Yonokma. Siloba winced himself, for, in the curing of an arrow wound which he carried
at his left collarbone, his stomach had been lanced in several places and blood drawn; while the arrow wound had
healed itself, the places of his cure had become infected and
still hurt him.
Together the men hoisted the stretcher and entered the
low ground. Tuesike was unconscious, and his body and face
had been covered with green straw. The procession wound
slowly through the black water of the swamp and, crossing
the Tokolik, entered the home territory. It disappeared once
more into the heavy swale of reeds and in a little while
emerged, near the kaio which guards the outermost of the
fields. Already, at the Liberek, dancing had started, and the
chants of triumph did not cease at dark but rose and fell
throughout the evening, from all the villages below the
mountain.

The next morning U-mue's men adjusted their
appearance. This was a slow and careful process. Yeke Asuk
and Hanumoak, both single men, took the most pains, not
only because both were vain but because the etai was traditionally an occasion for showing off one's beauty to the
women and thus laying the groundwork for liaisons or wife86 •

stealing. The women would dress too, to the best of their
ability, especially those discontented wives amenable to the
idea of being stolen.
Yeke Asuk, though still quite young, had already had
three wives and was not in haste to find another. The first
three had left him, less because they did not like him than
because he had paid no attention to them, pursuing the
single life to the best of his ability. Hanumoak, on the other
hand, had never had sufficient property to obtain a wife; he
had lived in U-mue's pilai ever since a quarrel with his
brother. But he did own a fine headdress of bird of paradise,
the black plumes of which rose three feet from the fiber headband of pandanus. He arranged the plumes upon his mass
of hair, very careful that a certain amount of hair should
show beneath them. He then smeared his face and shoulders
with a gray wad of fresh pig grease and singed in the fire
some straw from the pilai floor; the ash of this he rubbed
into the grease, using his thumb. In this way he blackened
his forehead, which was naturally blackish-brown, and drew
a clean black line about an inch in breadth across his cheekbones and the bridge of his nose. Hanumoak is handsome,
but his face is rather soft, and the hard black band, making
his eyes more fierce, became him.
Yeke Asuk is not handsome, and the hair on top of his
huge brow is nondescript. Of late he has worn a spray of
cassowary plumes, but this has not pleased him, and today
he replaced it with seven white egret feathers. Like Hanumoak, he greased his face and drew a black line across his
cheekbones, but his forehead, beneath which his pug face
is squashed, he treated with special attention. He took a
dried piece of red clay and rubbed it on a stone; the dust
he moistened with water, producing the dye he needed. His
red eyes, when at last they passed inspection, gave him a
remarkable look of choler. Both Hanumoak and Yeke Asuk
• 87

put on their snail-shell bibs, and Yeke Asuk also put a boar's
tusk in his hair. To his rattan stomach hoops, behind, he
fastened a long green leaf of spiderwort which lay on the
cleft of his buttocks and, thus adorned, he scrambled on all
fours out of the pilai.
With other warriors, Yeke Asuk and Hanumoak went
with their spears to a hillside above Abukumo to stage a preliminary celebration: the location was chosen to provide any
Wittaia not at Huwai's funeral with a clear view of the celebration of his death. From this point, early in the afternoon,
the warriors would move on to the Liberek.
At the Liberek, during the morning, a few young boys
and women had collected. Husuk and his men, passing
through from the villages of the Kosi-Alua, went on to a
frontier kaio, where they staged a small dance comparable
to that being held above Abukumo. The sun boiled a damp
close air, and a large black harrier with gray tail feathers
quartered low and lazily above the bushes.
The sun had already reached its crest when a large
company of women came, led by the tall young wife of
Wereklowe's son. She is a handsome girl with a strange abstracted gaze, and for the etai she had dressed herself like a
young warrior. In addition to the mikak she had worn the
day before, dancing alone in the twilight of the Waraba, she
had red and black plumes of birds of paradise. Snail shells
in separate strings rather than the close bib favored by the
men swayed gracefully between her breasts as she began to
dance. In a small circle on the grass of the etai meadow she
moved slowly, as if feeling for her rhythm, and as she did so
she began to call, We-Re-A Re—WAY! We-Re-A-Re—WAH!
Another woman answered with the high, pure hoot of chorus,
and the rest joined them, moving forward. Most of the
women had confined their decoration to a thick coat of yellow ocher or gray clay, but a few had feather crowns or
88 •

shell bibs or inferior small mikaks. From the masks of clay
their dark eyes glared, depthless and spectral. Led by the
girl, they moved back and forth in a massed body, wheeling
sharply at the end of each phrase, We-Re-A-Re—WAY! WeRe-A-Re—WAH! the turn being made on the WAY or the
WAH. Periodically they would screech, breaking into a
heavy run, breasts flying, faster and faster and faster in a
tight, driven circle, like creatures fleeing pain. Small girls in
their reed skirts pattered hopelessly along on the fringe of
the bodies, until exhaustion spun them away from their
mothers; they sank in little heaps into the grass.
Then the women would stop, getting their breath and
laughing, until one of their number, softly and slowly at first,
would renew the chant and begin to sway, moving her arms
languorously in and out. The others would take it up, and
the dance would be repeated, up the field and down, around
and around, the nets sailing on the turns to bare hard
buttocks pinched tight by the coil skirts. At the side of the
field the oldest women swayed in accompaniment, their
mantis arms outstretched, their long feet twitching. U-mue's
old mother, Aneake, was one of these, calling out fiercely.
At the west end of the meadow the boys and old men
sat in the shelter. Some of the men performed on each other's
faces the plucking of hairs from the upper lip and the neatening of beards, using the pitch of the araucaria and araucaria-twig tweezers; while almost all men wear short beards,
the mustache is considered very ugly. The legs were also
cleaned of hairs, and the hips and pubis, until the dark skin
gleamed. One old man appeared from the bushes with the
lost smile of uncertain eyesight: he was greeted with affection, and a young warrior barbered him. Other warriors had
gathered, and now the Kosi-Alua at the kaio in the distance
were mustering for their entry upon the Liberek.
The women danced on, for this was the last hour that
• 89

they would have the meadow to themselves. Two carried
infants on their shoulders, and the head of one of these was
submerged in a man's white egret crown; with his mother,
from behind, he formed a giant, rushed along by the lesser
creatures underneath.
We-a-AY

O-o-Aia-OH

The men came in midafternoon, arriving from two directions simultaneously. They massed at the end of the field,
then charged across it, spears held high against the clouds
and long plumes tossing. Immediately they turned and thundered back again, AY-A-Wo-AI, then broke to form a roaring circle. Some women rushed in from the side to mingle
with the fringes of the men; as the speed increased, they ran
more like men than women, the sulphurous colors of their
bodies blotting out without obscuring the female breasts and
hips. Ay-HOO, ay-HOO, the women wailed, their voices remote in the men's tumult. Just as their grief was deeper at
the funerals, their joy was fiercer in etai, as if all of their
emotions, accumulating in their long brown days, must find
release in this abandon.
As the father of the man revenged, Yoroick was the
guest of honor. He wore no decoration but the yellow clay,
which was daubed thickly on his head and shoulders. Even
his hair was yellow-white, patriarchal, and, with his great
height among the men, he looked like some mad hermit,
naked and glaring in the wilderness. He crouched down at
a small fire near the shelter, mourning his son among the
older men; the soft, wailing wind they made rose with
strange force against the storm of victory. The old men,
bony-spined, sat with bent heads over a clear flame invisible
in the sunlight.
Yoroick rose suddenly with a hoarse shout. Seizing his
spear, he bolted down the field through the startled dancers.
90 •

The dancing stopped, and a deep moan arose. The men of
the Kosi-Alua took up their spears and followed.
The cause of the outcry was the soft-walking U-mue.
Approaching the Liberek from the field above Homaklep,
U-mue had come upon one of the men who had seized his
youngest wife not long before. U-mue was accompanied by
four of his best warriors and perceived an excellent opportunity to avenge the outrage. A melee started up just beyond the etai field, but, before anyone was hurt, Yoroick got
wind of it and ran forward.
Yoroick is ordinarily a peaceable man, so peaceable that
his reticence in time of war is a matter of common knowledge, but on this day he was the important person, full of
noise and fire. Already in an excited state of mind, he was
greatly offended that U-mue should have caused a distraction on this epochal occasion. Yoroick was anxious to kill
U-mue, but he was prevented from doing so, not only by
the people who caught up with him but by U-mue himself,
who took his leave. The men calmed Yoroick and escorted
him back to the etai.
The Wuperainma warriors trailed behind, but they were
uneasy and remained on the outskirts of the celebration.
Yeke Asuk, particularly, moved up and down with uncustomary diffidence, Tegearek and two others at his side.
Over five hundred people were present, all of them
dressed to the best of their resources. Tukum the swineherd
wore a thin, battered mikak and some shell strings; he
bounced the shell strings on a round belly taut with sweet
potato, producing a hollow sound which made him laugh.
Some other boys carried their bows and arrows; they had
drawn white patterns on their bodies. Five yegerek wore
crowns of blossoms from the yellow rhododendron.
Wereklowe's son, who had run down the Wittaia and
killed him with his spear, caused a quiet stir of greeting and
• 91

respect as he moved about; in his hair were silver streaks of
clay. A man with a headdress of red ginger flowers sat beside
another with red feathers, in a pair, jutting out from his
temples like low horns. Limo wore the long barred feathers
of a large hawk; he sat in silence, watching, his handsome
face, like that of Kurelu, gentle and merciless by turns.
Nilik swayed, facing the dancers; he had armlets of thick
fur of a rich brown luster, and a red and black wig of tiny
seeds strung in cordy strands like hard, long hair. Nilik, as
the political leader of the successful raid, was anxious to assert himself and did so.
Rain drifted from the mountains in the wake of a soft
sun of twilight. Some older people moved onto the savanna
paths toward home, but the dancers surged and chanted
back and forth, undiminished. To one side of the central
bodies a girl dyed red pranced back and forth with a girl of
dead gray color; on the far side the tall wife of Wereklowe's
son, with two men and another woman, formed a line apart,
moving ceaselessly up and down the field with loose-limbed
fervor. She had danced all afternoon, in a kind of trance, and
was still dancing when Yoroick, perhaps fearing that he had
lost his world's attention, cried out again: he wished that
the men of the Kosi-AIua fall upon U-mue's men and kill
them. Hanumoak, though he is Yoroick's youngest brother,
moved out toward the brush uneasily, joining his friends.
But the men of the Kosi-AIua were not prepared to act on
Yoroick's wish, and the shouting died.
Aloro stood alone and watched the dancers. He stood
on his good right leg, still as a heron, supporting his left side
with his spear. He too wore the barred feathers of a hawk,
and he had painted white circles around his eyes. He seemed
to avoid the looks of others, as if ashamed that he could not
dance.
Aloro's eyes slant back into his forehead, and his mouth
92 •

hangs open in a way less slack than wolfish; without taking
his eyes from the dancers, he turned his head slowly, as a
predator will, to pick up sounds from behind and from the
sides. The white eyes and the toothed grin which is not a
grin gave him an air of madness.

The day after the etai Tuesike was brought down
from the sleeping loft of his pilai. The pilai belongs to Asokmeke and is inhabited also by Siba, Tegearek, and Tekman
Bio, as well as by Asok-meke's small son, Tukum. Tuesike
was helped to a sitting position against one of the frames of
the pilai fire, and rattan was strung from one post to the next
to support his head. He breathed slowly and poorly, and it
was thought that he would die.
Tukum slipped in and sat down next to him, holding a
piece of hiperi. Over a period of time he nibbled at it, chewing slowly, intermittently, to avoid the pain of swallowing.
From time to time he coughed, a taut, dry cough that caused
him to turn and stare at the other men in surprise and pain.
Tuesike's eyes looked glazed, and he did not respond to
the friends who had come to sit with him, but remained with
his back to the ashes of the morning fire, staring into the
dark recesses of the round house.
Asok-meke, who was in tears, was crying for Tuesike,
but he also cried with pleasure because a friend whom he
had not seen for a long time had come to visit him from the
Siep-Kosi. At these times, crying was the custom.
Thunder rolled out of the mountains like an avalanche,
and the rain came down. An old man wove ceaselessly at the
• 93

cowrie belt used in funerals, and in the darkness by the wall
Aloro drew unearthly sounds from his cane harp. The other
men, fourteen in all, sat smoking. They gazed stolidly outward at the mud forming in the sili yard, absorbed by the
brown certainties of their own lives.

A few days later Tuesike was much improved, and in
the early afternoon he sat alone, facing the doorway. Though
he was not comfortable, he was not really in pain. Blood had
been let from two cuts in his stomach, near the hole made by
the arrow, and the long red point of the arrow itself was
there above his head for any visitors to admire, on the rack
over the fire frame. With it was an arrow point removed previously from the body of Tegearek.
Tuesike had felt much better since the capture and
cutting of a field mouse and a rat. The cutting was done by
Aloro. The belly skins of the animals, still alive, were slit
open with a bamboo knife: if the stomach wall had been
pierced and entrails spilled, Tuesike's own wound would
have been mortal, but the entrails of both animals had remained intact, as his own must therefore be. The rat ceremony was only performed when death was close, and everyone had been much reassured; more likely than not, had the
hand of Aloro been less steady, Tuesike would have given
up and died. At the moment the animals hung from the fire
94 •

rack behind him, strung up by the throat. The teeth of the
rat were bared and its tail hung in a stiff curl, as if it had
tried to climb or gnaw its string.
That morning Siba had made a fetish. This fetish was
a piece of cane three or four feet long into which feathers
had been inserted, in the end and along the length. Tuesike
had crept outside, and the cane, with a bundle of lukaka
grass, was waved over his head. Once Tuesike had been
treated, it was planted on the path in front of Wuperainma;
the grass was laid at its foot, wrapped in pavi leaves. Pavi is
a word which also means both enemy and excrement, but
the choice of this leaf was purely fortuitous, the pavi tree,
in this spot, being the closest growth at hand. The grass
bundle, on the other hand, is almost invariably used in any
such communication with the ghosts.
A man badly wounded, and thus troubled in body and
spirit, is especially vulnerable to the wiles of ghosts. The
fetish was placed between Tuesike and enemy lands to show
the ghost of Huwai that the Kurelu were aware of its intentions and had taken suitable precautions; the grass bundle, like the bundle placed around the base of a new kaio,
was there to indicate that a close watch was being kept.
Siba was confident that his warning would keep the
ghost away, and Tuesike felt much better for it. He touched
with his lingers the leaf poultices on his wounds and coughed
a little. He had gotten very thin. In the silence of the afternoon he listened to a pig—the sound was more like a hollow
thump than a live grunt—and to the peaceful droning of
the flies, the flies of summer, in a summer which would never
end.

• 95

In a war of the yegerek Uwar was struck beneath
the right eye by a grass spear; this accident is a common one
and accounts for the large incidence of boys and men among
the Kurelu who are blind in one eye. Uwar barely escaped
blinding. Though he was badly hurt and crying, he found
the shaft of reed which struck him and took it to U-mue's
pilai. Unless he is very lucky, he will do this again some other
day, in the wars with the Wittaia. The arrow will be of hard,
sharp cane, and, more likely than not, it will be carried back
for him by another warrior.

In the village of Abukumo, which lies on a low
spur of the mountain between Homaklep and the Aike, there
is a sili abandoned after an argument between its owners.
The small garden of the sili is sadly overgrown with amaranth and daisies, and the huts, weighted down by rotted
thatch, sag slowly among the weeds.
The sili was owned formerly by three brothers. The
eldest, Yoroick, left Abukumo and went to live with the
Kosi-Alua, outraged by the seduction of one of his wives by
the second brother, Werene: Yoroick's name means "Pigeon,"
and Werene's name means "Parrot," and Pigeon had previously done to Parrot what Parrot was subsequently to do to
Pigeon. Since physical retribution is usually avoided except
96 •

by the kains and the violent ones, the fitting revenge is
thought to be the identical offense.
Before long Werene left the sili too. He moved down
the slope to Homaklep, taking with him a third brother,
Hanumoak, at that time no more than a child. One day, a
few years later, Hanumoak refused Werene's command that
he go out to work in the gardens. After the quarrel which
occurred, Hanumoak left Werene's sili and moved to the
pilai of U-mue in Wuperainma.
Another old sili adjoining the abandoned one is occupied by a kepu man and his sick father, and a third is being
restored by Asikanalek: Asikanalek, a solitary man, is a very
brave young war kain of the clan Alua whose name, "No
Sound of Bow"—literally, Sike-Ane-Lek, or "Bow Voice Not"
—refers to the cessation of the wars with the Siep-Kosi. Already a new pilai has been constructed, where his old father
can blink away his days, and in early May, Asikanalek started
work on a new cooking shed. Assisted by his neighbor, he
turned the dogged earth. The earth was hard-surfaced, baked
to rust-colored ceramic by old fires, and with his digging
stick he chunked into it, foot by foot, while the other man
spread the raw hunks of clay on the old yard.
When the foundation of the new shed was completed,
two hollow trunks of the pandanus were laid parallel as sills.
The ends of the structure were erected, followed by the front
and back. Each side was a double wall of oak and beech
slats pounded and worked into the ground. Cross slats were
wedged down between the uprights, knocked tight by a
heavy wooden knout, and the whole affair was lashed with
strong rattan: to tighten the bindings, Asikanalek would
place one foot high on the wall and haul on the rattan with
his whole weight.
In the wall at each end a central post had been installed,
• 97

and a ridgepole was laid down the length of the shed. The
slat roof was laid against the ridgepole, forming a peak, and
the slats were covered with a loose layer of cane strips, before the whole was thatched. Air spaces had been left at the
ends of the shed, between the wall top and the peak, and
the structure was nowhere tight, in order that the smoke of
the fires could readily escape. The fires were placed between
each of three posts supporting the roof. By the time of the
new moon the shed would be in use, and it would shortly
acquire the interior smell of all the buildings in the valley.
In the pilai, sitting before the fire, Asikanalek's old father supported his rotted frame by clinging to a rattan strung
between two posts. At one time a warrior who had killed
three, he had now reached extreme old age and had
shrunk away to nothing. His skeleton, casting off its long
disguise of flesh and blood, asserted itself indecently, and
the long nails grew untended, as nails grow in a grave, an
inch or more of yellow horn scratching fitfully among the
few leaves of lisanika scattered between his feet. His skin,
long dead, contrasted with the gleam of the cane ceiling
greased black by the fire smoke. It was encrusted with
hard scabs, as if his pores were to close over, one by
one. His eyes, drained of all depth and luster, were two flat,
rimless wet places on his face.
But still he heard and saw and smiled, and he could stir.
He lifted a lisanika leaf toward his mouth, for his hands recalled tobacco; the lisanika leaf is always moistened before
the tobacco is rolled into it. The yellow nails scratched dryly
on the leaf, a mousy sound, as his gums lost it. There was no
moisture in his mouth, and when the leaf escaped him he
forgot about it. His feet were cold, and very slowly he lifted
the bone club of his right heel toward the flame.
Asikanalek's child Namilike came in. Though girls and
women are forbidden to enter the pilai, small children of
98 •

either sex are at times tolerated, and Namilike cannot be
more than four. Like all the other little girls, she wears a
miniature grass skirt, a circlet of soft reed gathered at the
water's edge, and she has her own small net. Namilike has
large eyes and large eyebrows and a smiling mouth, and she
is the prettiest child in the southern Kurelu. She sat next to
her grandfather, her hand with its missing fingers on his
dead knee, and at the same time unaware of him, as if he
had assumed a final place among the dull brown packets of
smoked straw and withered leaves which hung like bats from
the dark rafters.

Woluklek is a wild-eyed man with an enchanted
smile, and he is almost always by himself, Like Apeore,
Tuesike, and Asikanalek, he is a solitary. But while Apeore
and Asikanalek go their way alone because they like it, and
Tuesike seems cut off from others out of shyness, Woluklek
is alone because he is unique, and his solitude, though
marked, is his condition. Unlike the others, he is not a respected warrior, but neither is he kepu, in the sense of cowardice. In war Woluklek is very often at the fore, but his
activity is distracted, aimless, as if he had wandered across
the battle lines on his way elsewhere and remained within
the range of death out of bemusement. Yet he is not simple.
It is as if, on the sunny paths of childhood, he had strayed
out of his world into a dream and allowed the dream to waft
him where it would, his life or death a matter of indifference.
So now he moved slowly through the world of shadows
and hanging shapes which is the montane forest, squatting
• 99

here and there to stare and pick, and passing on; he had no
real errand, no real destination, a habitual circumstance
which, by itself, had isolated him from others long before.
Woluklek wore no decoration on his head or breast: the
whites of his large eyes excepted, he was dark as the earth
beneath a stone. Behind, however, he had equipped himself
with a strange fern, suspended from his horim string. The
fern was bent from having been sat upon askew and stuck
out to one side instead of hanging in the graceful way he
had had in mind before forgetting it was there.
The morning sun filtered through the leaves in patches,
alighting on red fruits of the pandanus. Single stems of
giant bamboo shot toward holes of light or curved with
languid stiffness back to earth, only to bend up again, toward the tip, like the head of a hunting snake. Large trunks
of beech and myrtle loomed in the mass of foliage, to vanish
into the green worlds of the canopy. Where a giant tree had
fallen, an undergrowth of lesser plants fought for place in
the new sun—rattan and scrambling fern and tall stalks of
wild ginger with its scarlet flower.
Whistlers and honey eaters flicked quickly through the
wood, their voices lost in the rush of a small stream. Woluklek squatted once again to eat gilled mushrooms. Woluklek liked to squat upon his heels and often did so even
when the other men were standing, as if this angle gave him
new perspective.
He moved onto the open slopes and down the white
sand of the trickling stream bed, toward the valley floor.
Along this path, in the sand beneath an overhanging boulder,
some tribesman waiting out a rain had drawn the course of
the Baliem River with sweeping arabesques of his foot.
Woluklek investigated the sand drawing with pleasure and
then, with his own foot, changed the course of the Baliem.
The boulder was one of an assembly of great rocks:
100 •

close by, the path detoured down through a steep cleft between two others. This place was rarely visited by the people. It was a dark, dripping niche of ferns and mosses, with a
solitary pandanus, sprawling and twisted in a welter of its
own leaves, as if defeated in its passage toward the sun.
Here, on a narrow ledge, protected from the water drops of
yellowish short stalactites, lay remnant bones of two Wittaia.
The enemy had been killed years before, and their
bodies left to rot: eventually the bones had been placed
upon this ledge so that the earth itself, in the slow fall of
leaves and petals from the sun above, would not bury them
and thus lay them to rest. Woluklek was vague about the
story, though it was claimed that the enemy had not been
eaten. The akuni did not eat people, but they knew that this
was done quite frequently in the southern valley. Only a few
months before, a raiding party of people living near the AsoLokopals had been cut off and wiped out by the Hisaro.
There were more than twenty killed, and all of these men
were roasted in a rock fire and consumed. The bones were
placed out in the forest, in a wisa ground; this ground was
considered very dangerous because of its great company of
vengeful ghosts.
Woluklek skirted by the place of bones and went on
down the hill into the sunshine. Passing a rhododendron, he
plucked an unopened blossom. He bit off the tip and hollowed it and, by holding it pressed to his lower lip and blowing, was able to produce a shrill, thin whistle.

• 101

On the tower of his kaio, far out in the center of
the fields, Wereklowe sat perched like a great bird. In the
shelter below, his warriors mended arrows and wove armlets.
Wereklowe, like Kurelu himself, dressed simply. Unlike the
lesser kains, who were always in white regalia, Wereklowe
was content with the flat black pig intestines at his throat
and an armlet the color of pale gold braided onto his left
wrist.
All the great fields to the north of the kaio belonged to
him, and the women who worked in them, and even the
men, and the kaio itself—he included them all with a wave
of his arm. An-meke, he called them, Mine, grasping and
shaking his horim. And Wereklowe smiled his ecstatic savage smile, a restless smile, constantly working, forcing great
creases on his lean cheeks, a smile at the same time merry
and without mercy.
Wereklowe's name means "He Who Never Works in
Fields." It was given originally as a rebuke, but Wereklowe
made no attempt to rid himself of the name. He has killed
ten men, and the time is long since past when work in the
fields would be expected of him: he is the leader of the Alua,
and the great war kain of the tribe, with seven wives, a
dozen pigs, and eight fine children. Only Kurelu himself,
with ten, has more wives than Wereklowe.
Probably there is no man in the Kurelu who has killed
more enemies than Wereklowe. But in the Hisaro clans to
the southward there is a kain who is said to have taken more
than one hundred lives. He is notorious throughout the valley, even among tribes like the Kurelu which have no contact with his own. In the course of an ordinary lifetime of
102 •

tribal wars and raids it would not be possible to kill one
hundred people, but this kain is not an ordinary man. A
fanatic warrior in battle, he prowls as well on solitary raids
into the countries of his enemies, killing quietly where
chance offers. On one occasion he accosted a woman on a
lonely path: the woman, assuming the stranger was bent on
rape, lay down philosophically to receive him. His spear lay
beside them, and, instead of raping her, he drove the spear
inside her. Another time he entered a sili at midday, when
only old women, infants, and sick people would be about.
A sick boy in the pilai invited him to rest himself in the loft
above until the men might return; when both had climbed
into the darkness, the stranger strangled his young host and
took his leave.
Despite the number of enemies to his credit, this man's
need to take life is unfamiliar to the Dani and makes even
his own people uneasy. The criminality of his acts is recognized; unlike Wereklowe, he is despised as well as feared.
Besides Wereklowe, the Alua kains include Polik, Weaklekek, Limo, and Asikanalek, village kain of Abukumo; the
clan Alua, with its sub-clan the Halluk, is the strongest in
the southern Kurelu.
After Wereklowe, the most powerful of these kains is
Polik, leader of the Halluk. Polik is a tall old man with
straight hair in stiff, cordy strings down to his shoulders;
sometimes he wears a magnificent fur crown, and he is never
without an enormous broad-bladed white spear eighteen
feet long.
As a young warrior Polik behaved strangely and violently and is said to have killed more than one of his own
people; because he was feared, he was given the name Mokat, meaning "Ghost." To this day he is commonly referred
to by this name, with great respect: Mokat kain kok-meke!
—Mokat is a great kain! His present name, which stems from
• 103

"He Who Came Up from Behind," recalls his bravery in a
battle of long ago, when he circled back and saved the life
of a man cut off by the enemy. Polik is never far from the
front line, and his fierce shouts of encouragement and warning are a part of every war.
Polik is proud of his strong voice, which dominates not
only wars but funerals. Above all else, he loves to sing. When
Polik sings, a sleepy smile comes to his face, and he tosses
his great head from side to side in his slow rhythm, so that
his heavy hair flops on his shoulders. He sings songs of war
and raids, of love and gardens, but sometimes he sings little
wordless songs of sheer contentment, alone on a high rock
on the sunny hillside.
Ye-we-o

Ya wo-o-lo
Ma-ya-um
We le-le-e
Ko-lo-lo

One night in late May, while the giant frogmouth,
red-eyed and yellow-mouthed, called sepulchrally from the
starry points of araucaria, the valley shuddered in an earthquake; the earthquake lasted only a few moments, two brief
spasms, and then the earth was still again and the frogmouth
resumed its lugubrious night song.
There are volcanic regions at both ends of the great
island, but the central highlands are without volcanoes, and
earthquakes are quite rare. In this equatorial climate, without seasons, where the steady pressure of the trade winds
makes rain and sun constants of every day, nature is less
violent than remorseless. High winds, drought, the torrential
104 •

rainstorms of the monsoon coasts, are almost unknown, and
perhaps this is why the akuni, taking for granted their mild,
equable weathers, have not invested the rare tempests and
earthquakes with supernatural powers; as a people they are
notably unsuperstitious. Heat lightning is said to be the
blood of a man killed by his enemies, rising into the sky, and
the sky itself is thought to harbor other peoples; there was
a rope leading down to earth, but, as the sky peoples stole
too many pigs and women, the rope was cut. According to
Asikanalek, the rope was cut by Kurelu himself, but U-mue
says no, the rope was cut long, long ago.
On the night of the earthquake the men of U-mue's
pilai descended from the sleeping loft and smoked; they
talked uneasily of the earthquake and wondered at its
origin and, after a while, returned above and went to sleep.

• 105

• A full moon came at the end of May, and, as it
filled, a fresh wind of the southeast trades, which prevail
from May until October, cleared the humid airs. Buffy night
herons had come into the valley and circled the landscapes
with the blue heron and egret; the black ducks, now very
numerous with the new birds of the spring nests, were joined
by the solitary mountain duck, a rare small species, black
and white, with a bright orange bill. Together they curved
down in the afternoons into the ditches of the fields.
The mountain duck has flown these valleys for a million
years and has never been seen anywhere but in the highlands; probably it evolved when the valley floor was still a
glaciated lake traversed by limestone salients and ridges.
The lakes and marshlands lay between the ridges, and the
ducks gabbled in warm mornings never seen by man. But
the limestone barriers eroded quickly, and the lakes seeped
away. The Siobara, like a great pyramid in the center of the
valley, is probably a remnant of just such a ridge, while high
ground like the Tokolik may well have been lake shore: the
lake-floor gardens, were they not drained by ditches, would
still be part of the acid marshland which surrounds the
Waraba.
The dry ground in those old millenniums, and the lower
slopes to nearly seven thousand feet, were forested by tropic
oaks and chestnuts interspersed with stands of araucaria.
The oak-and-chestnut forest was a sign of arable land and,
with the coming of man, was the first casualty; its destruction was hastened by the advent of the sweet potato, though
whether this occurred three centuries or three thousand years
ago cannot be known. The hiperi, and the large population
106

•

which its cultivation permitted, encouraged extensive clearing; across the centuries the fields crept up the slopes, trailing the forest, and the drainage and development of the
valley floor evolved. Each garden was short-lived; once the
topsoil was cropped out and leached away by year-round
planting, it was abandoned and a new plot slashed and
burned and cleared.
The topsoil inevitably went quickly. Alluvial sediment,
sifted down across the ages from the high massifs, it was a
poor compound of limestone and quartz sandstone; the
limestone, weathered, produced a weak, soluble soil and,
in the end, dead white quartzitic sand: patches of this
sand erupted long ago along the base of the Siobara and on
the rain-leached hills, the bare bones of a limy, anemic earth.
In consequence, after a year or two or three, the gardens
must be abandoned to savanna. The savanna is all but
wasteland. Except for small rodents caught for rituals,
there are no animals worth hunting. The grass shelters a tiny
quail, a small gray rail, a scattering of songbirds like the
robin chat and fairy-wren and black-headed weaver finch:
the paucity of grassland birds which have occupied the
open regions hints that the history of the akuni in the Baliem
has been a brief one, for the grassland is of their making. But
the time of their own coming the akuni cannot tell, only that
it was long ago, with the father of their fathers. The villages
rot, and the dead go up in fire, and their history decomposes
in the soil.
In the clear days which accompanied the flowering of
the moon, a new black patch appeared below Wuperainma,
in the bottom of what once had been an ancient pond. Here
Tegearek and Werene reclaimed a garden. The work was
hard, for the shrubs had long ago established solid banks,
even small trees, and the ground between was bound up
tight with mats of roots. The sides of the old drainage ditches
• 107

had fallen in, and the shallow water was choked off with
weeds and rushes.
The two men worked adjoining plots and sometimes
worked together. From day to day their helpers changed, in
the intricate patterns of kinship and obligation. Each man
had a heavy digging stick, which he drove into dark, grudging earth of purple-brown: the sticks made a dull biting
sound and a muffled cracking as the roots were pried and
snapped. The litter of fire-blackened stumps and roots on
the scorched ground gave the whole scene an air of barren
land, to be worked in vain by the black, panting bodies.
Only a few yards away, across the ditches, the undergrowth
stood in wait, as if ready to retake this ground at the first
sign of negligence: beneath the blossoms and the bright
green leaves, the roots were creeping forward, and the new
seeds fattened with every sun in the receptacles of the
flowers.
Werene the Parrot spat in the dry sun, a neat, quiet,
and uneasy man who wears a string of pale blue grass seeds,
the Job's Tears, across his forehead; like his young brother
Hanumoak he is a handsome man, but his face is weak and
sour, as if he knew that his ambitions must go unfulfilled for
want of the power or courage to see them implemented.

A young woman of the Siep-Kosi came to visit the
southern villages, and Weaklekek detained her as a wife;
the girl was put to work in the gardens below Puakaloba,
where he was able to keep an eye on her.
U-mue, hearing of this girl and wishing her for himself,
108 •

had demanded immediately to know if she were wita or
waia, the two moieties or marriage groups into which all
clans in the valley are divided, according to their patrilineal
line. If Weaklekek, a waia, should make love to a waia
woman, both of them might be put to death and their bodies
thrown out into the fields to rot. The prohibition is an ancient
one, so ancient that no explanation is known; it is not connected by the akuni with incest. Two associated clans are
invariably wita and waia, so that marriage may take place
between them, just as two men who share a sili are apt to
be wita and waia, for, if both were wita, they could make
love to each other's wives. The Wilil are wita, the Haiman
waia, the Walilo wita, and Alua waia. Weaklekek had very
soon determined the girl's moiety—it is the first question
asked of any stranger who is not killed—which was wita.
Since U-mue, as a Wilil, was wita also, he was thus ineligible. A few days later the girl herself resolved the matter by
fleeing back to the Siep-Kosi.

•

109

• This morning a party of Asuk-Palek people, led
by a kain named Torobia, prepared an ambush in the gardens of the northern Kurelu. The Asuk-Palek lived formerly
in the Kurelu, in the region of Wuperainma, but were driven
out long ago. Many were killed and many others had their
ears cut off; the rest settled among the Wittaia. At this time
they were named, and are called still, the Asuk-Palek, or
"Ears Cut."
While stalking the kaio, the Asuk-Palek were surprised
by three Kurelu, then by two more, coming from an opposite
direction. The five Kurelu saw immediately that they were
outnumbered, while Torobia's band imagined that they had
blundered into an ambush. Both sides fled. Polik and his
men, who were nearby, pursued the party of Asuk-Palek.
They wounded one man and they caught Torobia; while
some held him, others ran him through with spears. From
his head they cut some bits of hair. There is rarely time or
opportunity to stop and strip an enemy body, and the hair
is therefore a prized fetish.
Tonight the celebration started in Abulopak, where Polik lives with his kinsman, Wereklowe. The etai starts always
in Abulopak, which is the largest of the southern villages; it
is actually two villages in one, since it now includes the former Wilil stronghold which adjoins it. With few exceptions,
the most important kains and warriors of the Aike region live
in Abulopak or Wuperainma; the exceptions are Weaklekek
in Homaklep, Asikanalek in Abukumo, and Apeore in Lokoparek. The other villages in this region are thought of as
kepu, since they cannot claim an important kain or warrior
between them.
110 •

The whooping was pierced by the ringing whistle of
the huge cicadas; the cicadas cry briefly every evening just
at dark, as time-bound as the folding of the ferns. The evening passed, and the whooping rose toward a moon in its
final quarter, continuing on long after the insects had died
away. To Homuak there came an owl, hooting uneasily
against the din, and the great fruit bats, the flying foxes, on
slow leather wings, quartered the evergreen silhouettes. An
opossum coughed, and the nightjar with its great mouth and
whiskers took up its sepulchral song, an odd tok—tok, like a
shell rapped on a block of hollowed wood, interspersed with
froggish mutterings. Sometimes the green tree frogs called,
and sometimes the black dogs, crying: these strange animals
never bark, nor do they howl. Their sound is the wail of a
spirit trapped in the body of a dog, and its eeriness passes
onward through the night villages in the moon shadows of
the mountain wall.
At dawn Polik came to Homuak. Standing at the fire
site above the spring, he called, A-OH, A-OH. The cry was
taken up from the villages to north and south, and the long
day of etai which would celebrate Torobia's death had
started.
But the sun had not appeared above the rim when a
troop of warriors, still heavy-faced with sleep, trotted swiftly
through the grove, bearing their spears. One called out to
Polik, and he ran after them, grunting fiercely; the Wittaia,
still raging for revenge, had come in from the Tokolik and
set fire to a kaio shelter of the Kosi-Alua. They had destroyed
the tobacco patch and uprooted plots of sweet potatoes in
the gardens nearby.
The warriors passed through the low wood below Wuperainma and Homaklep, and over the grassy knoll called
Anelarok, where the women of Lokoparek, on their way to
the Liberek, would stop that day to dance. They ran on to•

111

ward the Aike, to guard against a raid from the Turaba, and
a group of eight had crossed to the Turaba itself, to act as
sentries.
The fair weather of the full moon had continued, and
a huge blue day expanded above the valley. From southeast
to southwest the rim was sharp as a black, jagged blade, with
only the northern wall lost in the white cloud mountains.
Thin wisps of mist drifted through the distant woods, like
spider webs trailed out by the soft wind; this was the trade
wind from the ocean, beyond the high horizons, which had
dried the valley floor in a rare four days without rain. For
the first time since the early days of April the sun rose cleanly
from behind the cliffs, scattering small brilliant puffs of
clouds: it gleamed on the rufous mantle of a white-headed
kite quartering low across the gardens of Weaklekek.
Wittaia appeared on the Tokolik, and a shout arose from
the villages beneath the wall; the warriors of the Kurelu
streamed out across the fields toward the frontier. More Wittaia convened on the near slope of the Waraba, in silent
wait. Polik went out with other men to the large central
kaio, which stands on a wide belt of high ground traversing
the main gardens. Tuesike was also there. He had done light
work in the few days past and was slowly resuming his life
as a warrior, but he moved uncertainly and was quieter than
before.
On the Turaba, meanwhile, some Kurelu sentries huddled together against the early cold. They had not dared
light the fire, for fear of revealing their position. Expecting
that any Wittaia ought to come from the direction of his
own country, they were facing westward, down the ridge,
and were startled when a man appeared quite suddenly
from behind them. At first they thought that the man was
Tekman Bio, but when he called out to them, they recognized in dismay a fierce warrior who, some years before,
112 •

fleeing the wrath of his own people, had been accepted by
the Wittaia: he knew every stone in the land of the Kurelu
and had crept up on the sentry party from behind. He also
knew the sentries and their caliber, and, though he had but
two men with him, they were good men, and he did not
hesitate to approach boldly. He yelled at the Kurelu to get
off the Turaba, that it was Wittaia land.
All the sentries except Hanumoak acted swiftly on the
assumption that the Wittaia had many others in the rocks
behind them; without pausing for their bows and spears,
they got off the Turaba so rapidly that big Woknabin
sprained Ms ankle. Hanumoak, the only true warrior in the
party, had been sitting a little apart, among the rocks; the
Wittaia had not seen him, and, instead of running, Hanumoak remained hidden, reluctant to lose his spear. A good
spear was carefully carved and very valuable, and a halfdozen had been left behind. But the Wittaia found the
spears and bows and bore them off in triumph. Meanwhile the sentries had raised the alarm, and a terrific howling echoed from the farther bank.
Polik and the rest ran toward the Aike, starting a frightened gray rail from the grass. Other bands led by Yeke Asuk
and Weaklekek were strung out across the distance, coming
fast. A large company of Wittaia, a hundred spears or more,
sprang up suddenly along the crest of the Turaba, and the
two tribes hurled insults at each other across the brown,
swift silence of the river. In the confusion Hanumoak slipped
down among the boulders and returned across the Aike at
the land bridge, where the torrent dives beneath a wide
ledge of rock.
The enemy, incensed by the recent raids, were clamoring for war. In the weeks past they had lost Huwai, Torobia,
and at least four others, casualties of wounds suffered in the
wars, while the Kurelu had lost only one man. Their bold
• 113

appearance on the Tokolik and now the Turaba, with the
disgrace of the lost spears, had excited the Kurelu, and war
had become inevitable. The Wittaia moved slowly off the
Turaba, filing, spears high, down the ridge, and the Kurelu
moved out toward the frontier to wait for them. Men of the
Kosi-Alua, assembling for the etai, were in war regalia; instead of going to the etai field, they went to the Tokolik. On
the flanks of the Waraba another large company of Wittaia
watched them come.
The Kurelu filed carefully through the swamp below
the Waraba but remained within the cover of the sedges;
when they outnumbered the advance Wittaia, the latter retired to the crest, awaiting reinforcements. The withdrawal
brought a yell from the Kurelu, who surged onto the flank
of the hill; in a short time they had gained the crest and
driven the enemy to the west end of the L. In the brief
skirmishing which took place Tegearek received an arrow
in the small of his back, and a son of Maitmo, kain of the
Haiman, was wounded also.
On the Tokolik the men were rallied by Nilik, kain of
the Walilo. Nilik is a tall hawk-faced man with a harsh voice
and darting eyes, and he was presently engaged in a power
struggle with Kurelu. The dispute concerned the ownership
of the ap warek—literally, "dead men," the booty—which
came of the raid and resultant battle in which Huwai had
been killed. The ap warek are held by the great kains, and
in the past Kurelu would have received them, but this time
Nilik had kept them and shared them with his kinsman
Yoroick, in honor of whose son the raid had taken place;
Nilik had also claimed the spoils taken from Torobia. Now
he harangued the older men and lesser kains as they gathered and sat and smoked. He wore a tight brown head net,
like a skull cap, but, shoulders excepted, he was otherwise
1 14 •

undecorated: on his shoulders he wore a coat of heavy clay,
yellow-sulphurous in color.
Midday came, in a dead silence. On the west side of the
Siobara a large fire had been built, a signal to the Wittaia
allies that a war was to take place. By the shelters of the
frontier kaios the men waited in the languid drone of flies;
most would have preferred the etai, and few went forward
to join the warriors who had taken the Waraba. Beneath the
great araucaria by the Tokolik, Asok-meke took his arrows,
one by one, and scraped them sharp; Asok-meke is too old
to fight in the front lines but is still belligerent in the reserves. A bird of the grasslands called now and again, a solitary wistful note which accented the stillness. The blue sky
reigned, but the air turned heavy and lugubrious.
On an old man's shoulder, in the sun, a butterfly opened
and closed its wings as if to the rhythm of his breathing.
A band came from the Aike, led by Weaklekek. They
moved directly across the Tokolik and into the swamp, and
their passage caused an unspoken stir: all but the oldest
men rose to their feet and followed Weaklekek to the Waraba. The Wittaia held the long side on the L, and the Kurelu the short: the Wittaia side of the corner of the L would
be the fighting ground. Fighting began almost immediately.
The corner of the L forms the high point of the ridge,
a reed-covered knoll perhaps eighty feet above the swamp;
the advance Kurelu were gathered here. Husuk was there,
in shoulders of gray clay, and Limo and Weaklekek and a
scattering of warriors good and bad: the main group of the
Kurelu remained at the northern end, while a detachment
of warriors, constantly replaced, fought on the forward line.
The line extended from a grassy hollow in the corner of the
L, below the knoll, up into the large rocks of the ridge crest.
The fighting was still pantomimed, though a few arrows
• 115

flew; men of both sides darted out in seizures of bravado,
pranced and feinted with their spears, fled back again. The
Wittaia warriors were more gaudy than the Kurelu: one man
in feathers of black and red wore tusks in his nostrils which
stuck straight out to the sides instead of curling down, and
another had large white egret feathers in a cape which flew
the whole length of his back.
All took chances to display their splendor, but the Wittaia took more chances than the Kurelu, whose apathy about
the war was evident in their small numbers. The Wittaia
had come in hundreds, and large parties of warriors were
posted back along the ridge, with a reserve company of
nearly two hundred men in a huge black spear-thorned phalanx at the base of the Siobara.
On the knoll the Kurelu laughed indulgently at the
bravado of the elege Siloba, who took wild chances in the
forays, glancing backward for approval. Siloba is feckless
and frequently wounded. A roar went up when three brave
warriors ran into the rocks to seize a Wittaia spear; Asikanalek, reaching it, was set upon by eight or more Wittaia who
came at him from above, but he did not lose his head. He
backed off slowly into the shelter of the rocks on his own
side, holding the spearmen at bay until the moment for
rushing him had passed. A cheer went up; the spectators on
the knoll shook their heads and laughed.
Only Nilik and Maitmo were excited, the first because
he was asserting his new leadership, the second because his
son had been wounded in the morning: Maitmo had been
the most fanatic of the kains ever since the day a few moons
earlier when three of his wives had been killed by the Wittaia. But their fierce yelling failed to stir the warriors, many
of whom had started to move back toward the swamp, in
the direction of the etai field. Only a few among those at the
116 •

fore fought with intensity, kept company by Woluklek and a
scattering of leggy boys, brave and unfeathered, with small
wobbly spears and scraggy bows. Siloba, wounded in the
foot, limped back self-consciously, clutching the prized arrow tip where all could see it; he had chosen a look of worried modesty to conceal his pride, as if to say, I did only
what I could. Woluklek, with the immunity of an innocent,
took desperate chances aimlessly, gathering enemy arrows
with a happy smile as if he were gathering up nuts, and forgetting to fire any of his own. Weaklekek, Apeore, Hanumoak, and Walimo gave spine to the Kurelu line, while
U-mue, brandishing his spear in the second rank, shrieked
menace. Walimo had smeared his lower half with reddish
clay, like tights; he skipped frantically as a spear caromed
off his thigh but returned again to the front line, leaping and
bounding uselessly in the panic of his own bravado. But
most of the Wilihiman-Walalua declined to join the battle,
so much so that Maitmo, ranging up and down, shouted out
at them his contempt.
Below in the hollow, Aloro, disreputable beneath a
soiled white crown, fought beside some Kosi-Alua. Speared
through the arm only ten days before in a war on the north
frontier, he stalked and circled, aiming steadily and firing
from the hip. With weapons in his hands he attains grace,
as if the bow brought his body into balance. Aloro moved
up the hill and down, hunting his chance; he remained forward all the afternoon, when even Weaklekek had returned
to the knoll to rest. His arrows, sailing viciously across the
tops of rocks, kept his opponents low and wary. In battle
Aloro looks peaceful, almost sleepy.
But the Kurelu gravitated to the north tip of the Waraba, ignoring the catcalls of the enemy. In the late afternoon, they staged a preliminary etai, jumping in a circle as
• 117

they chanted, and a few had already started through the
swamp when the Wittaia howled out their frustration and
surged forward. They outnumbered the Kurelu, and they
seriously outnumbered the Kurelu who wished to fight: in
a few minutes they had overrun the lines and taken command of the high knoll. A myzomela, strayed across the
battlefield, bounded upward on the wave of noise; the sunlight caught on its crimson cordon as it vanished back into
the dull greens of the land.
The Kurelu had backed into the swamp, all but a small
company of warriors marshaled by Husuk and Weaklekek.
A horde of Wittaia danced down from the hilltop. The howling was immense, seeming to swell, to fill the twilight like a
thunder, and the Wittaia, white-tusked and feathered, shattered the long line of the hill, leaping and squatting with
the glinting spears; their gleaming bodies, bending, weaving, stretched to throw a spear, were magnificent and grim
in the strange light of the failing sky.
The Kurelu were also grim and struggled to withstand
them. The fighting was suddenly in savage earnest, with
neither taunts nor braggadocio. The arrows crossed one another in mid-air, dropping low and fast as the lines closed; a
Wittaia and a Kurelu, nearly colliding by mistake, fought
each other off with a clash of spears. All the warriors were
crouching now, to avoid getting hit in the stomach or the
chest, for the man thus wounded was more likely than not
to die. They moved across the hillside, squatting low, swift
as great spiders. Husuk moved among the men, touching
and reassuring them, but the wounded were already coming
back; a man clutched an arrow that protruded from his upper leg, and Wakilu of Sulaki held one that was buried in
his inner thigh, below the groin. Wakilu had sunk down just
beyond the fighting, and the men who operated on him
peered warily over his shoulder: when the arrow sprang free,
with a rush of blood, the men laughed in relief and hurried
118 •

toward the rear. Wakilu's wound was not serious, but it became infected, and two moons later he would die.
A man came back with an arrow through the skin of
his head, along the temple; the arrow protruded like a grotesque feather. Another sprouted foolishly from a young
warrior's right buttock; he returned unhappily to the end
of the ridge and sprawled on all fours while an old man dug
it out. The warrior grunted with each tug and smiled thinly
with relief when it was over. Other wounded hobbled back,
and even loud Huonke had miscalculated; he had been
speared in the upper leg, and he hastened rearward in consternation, his furtive face glancing back over his shoulder.
Walimo was wounded in the shoulder, and Hanumoak
caught an arrow on the hipbone, but neither wound was
serious, and nobody on either side was killed outright,
though a Wittaia was seriously speared and a Kosi-Alua was
wounded badly in the breast. Siba had come late to the war,
but in the final battle he was struck in the chest, just at the
right nipple.
More than fifteen of the Kurelu were wounded, and the
battle line fell apart. Another surge of the Wittaia drove the
Kurelu entirely off the ridge. The Wittaia screeched and
threatened from above, led by two fierce warriors who had
been in the forefront all day. One of these was young and
swift, with a fixed, quiet grin, the other a wild-mouthed man
whose long corded hair flopped crazily on his shoulders as
he leapt; from below, the two were silhouetted on the twilight sun, black spears shivering.
With a concerted hail of arrows, the Kurelu regained a
foothold on the Waraba. But dark was near, and the Wittaia
had already claimed the victory, moving off in triumph.
Both sides held a brief dance of victory: the Kurelu, despite
the defeat they had suffered, were proud that they had done
as well with such small numbers,
Kurelu himself had come and looked morose. He sat
• 119

alone in the tall grass, taking no part, as if he had learned,
just at that moment, that Nilik meant to claim the spoils of
war.

Among those injured on the Waraba, the only
man pleased with his wound was Walimo. Walimo's striking
dress and warlike behavior, unremarkable in the past, have
been encouraged by special circumstances: he has been
warned by Husuk that such behavior might save his life.
Some time ago Walimo paid a visit to clansmen among
the Huwikiak, on the far side of the Baliem. The Huwikiak
are allies of the Wittaia, and the journey was therefore a
very foolish one. Still, he returned safely, traveling by night.
The kains were very angry, thinking it bad luck for a man
to traffic with the enemy: treachery is punishable by death,
and while Walimo's act was in no way subversive, his airy
personality was not taken into account. Wereklowe and
Maitmo wish to kill him, and either he must run away or
try to redeem himself before it is too late.
Community punishment is rare and very serious, in the
exceptional cases when it is not fatal. Some years ago a man
of the Mokoko tribe on the far side of the Baliem was punished by his own village for setting fires in the fields. He
had a taste for mice and rats, which he would catch by
burning off the grass hiding their holes; when his fires endangered the crops of his neighbors, he was warned to give
them up. But his appetite was too strong for him, and one
day he was seized and held face down over a new fire of his
own making.
120 •

This man is a familiar figure along the banks of the
Baliem. He wears a fine mikak and an enormous headdress
of white feathers, framing a hideous shrunk face with neither
nose nor mouth. There is a small slit through which food
may be passed and from which a muffled sound fights free,
like a voice calling in a grave.

The etai for Torobia's death was held the following day. The men of Wuperainma did not go to special pains
for the etai, especially since three of their best men had
been hurt the day before. Hanumoak, by morning, only
winced a little when he moved, though he would limp for
a few days to come, and Tegearek sewed stolidly at a new
shell bib, for he is not a man readily disconcerted, even by
an arrow in his back. Behind him Siba sat, precisely where
Tuesike had sat two weeks before; like Tuesike, he would
survive, but he was in severe pain. His whole torso was
wrapped in taro leaves bound so tightly with vine that he
could scarcely get a breath, and his eyes bulged; his horim
had been snapped off like the broken bone of a bird and had
not been replaced. After a while he slumped onto one side,
clutching himself, and began to groan. Then he crept painfully to the dark wall in the back, and crouched there, facing
it. A second groan seemed less in pain than in fear, and his
friends glanced at one another in discomfort.
Most of the warriors retained their decoration of the
day before, including Weaklekek, who is the rare warrior
without vanity. He is content with his old modest battered
• 121

bib and rarely or never wears other decoration; as fast as
Weaklekek acquires wealth, he gives it all away.
Weaklekek's dignity and generosity are important criteria
for true kainship, and he ranks with Limo as an important
war kain of the Alua. But Weaklekek is more fearless and
less ruthless than is good for him, and he may not survive
to take a place as one of the great leaders. His clansman
Limo will survive, tall, classic Limo with very large eyes
full of reserve pov/er and contempt, who on the morning
of etai sat eating hiperi in Weaklekek's pilai, not with the
gusto and pleasure of his host, but with a sort of remote
arrogance, pointed up by his long tobacco pipe and by the
largest shell bib in the Kurelu. One is caught by Limo's face
and drowns in the coldness of his eyes.
Around them sat Asukwan and other warriors of the
pilai, all dressed far more splendidly than Weaklekek himself. Weaklekek squatted on his haunches, scraping potash
from a sweet potato, delighted with everyone and everything. From time to time he took up a new horim, still green,
and blew through it approvingly.
Weaklekek, trailed by Asukwan, went to the knoll called
Anelarok for the preliminary etai. There the men had gathered
in midmorning and begun to sing. Tekman Bio led the singing in his high, strange voice, as one man always does, and
the others chanted in response. On Tekman Bio's head the
strange blue-veined plume from the head of a bird of paradise
was mounted on the long black tail plume of another. As
he sang he plucked the hair from the buttocks and back legs
of a warrior prostrate on the ground, assisted by a man
seated on the other side. The Kurelu consider all body hair
unsightly and pick ceaselessly at those parts of one another
which are difficult for the owner of the hair to reach: the
plucking of backs, like the neatening of beards and the
122 •

reciprocal search for head lice, is an important part of the
etai's morning ritual. Asok-meke, too cross and hairy to be
bothered, has made himself an exception; he has strange
little tufts like black woolly lint all over him. Asok-meke
sang too, in a kind of exasperated groan, and even the man
on his stomach sang, his buttocks rising and falling with the
effort.
The singing was interrupted by a loud squalling from
the women of Wuperainma. The wife of Tegearek had run
away and was at this moment on her way to the Siep-Kosi;
she could not have been popular among the women, who
had decided to betray her.
Her path led behind Homaklep and Abukumo and up
into the mountains, and Tegearek moved without haste to
cut her off. He dragged her back to Wuperainma, where he
beat her. She uttered a series of long, pure screams, which
rang above the chant of etai, but the screams themselves
were largely ritual, part of her shame and penance.
Nilik came early to the Liberek. He had brought with
him the trophy bundle; there were seven or eight fine spears,
some bows and arrows, a cassowary whisk, and a small grass
packet containing the tufts of Torobia's hair. The "dead
men" were lashed to a pole stuck in the ground at the head
of the field, and Nilik sat beneath them at the fire, in the
central place. He wore his wig of ten thousand seeds, red
seeds and black, and over the wig a white crown of egret
feathers. The wig flew when he stood up to shout, and when
he danced; at other times it hung forward like a hood, and
his eyes peered sharply from beneath it.
In a pause in the dancing, Polik's men—those who had
killed Torobia—came to the fire and took up the trophies.
With these they charged to the center of the field, where
the trophies were held aloft. A great sighing shout arose,
• 123

and the men rushed back again in a close avalanche of bodies,
O-way-y-O.
Polik himself was present, in his monumental crown.
He was smiling his strange smile, benign and absent-minded,
but at the end of the afternoon he spoke rapidly and fiercely
to Nilik, apparently disputing the "dead men." Nilik spoke
fiercely in return, and at the end of the dispute he moved
to the pole and untied the trophies: these he entrusted to
two of his men, then wrenched the sapling itself out of the
ground. The men went away with the trophies, and Nilik
stalked behind them, the sapling on his shoulder, in the direction of the mountains.

Ekapuwe walked up and down the sili yard, alone
in the village of Lokoparek; as she walked she sang softly
to her new baby, who slept, invisible, far down in the bottom
folds of her empty net. The net was a new one, dyed in a
red and blue pattern. Ekapuwe was restless, and her walking
served to rock the baby. When she was not singing, she
would smoke, using the long holder which, despite her bony
feet and hanging breasts, gave her a certain elegance. In
the distance, under the cliff wall, some Kosi-Alua were
cutting wood, and the tock of the stone adze echoed monotonously across the forest.
Before long the sound ceased, for war had been called
on the northwest frontier, and the woodsmen had departed.
Husuk had come that morning to fetch Wereklowe, and
some other warriors had gone along. U-mue did not go: he
124 •

was cutting a new field in the pandanus forest of Lokoparek.
To break the silence, Ekapuwe yelled at her husband, but
he did not answer.

Aku, who may have known eight springs, and her
friends Eken of Homaklep and Werekma, the pretty daughter of Loliluk, wandered in the afternoon onto the hillsides.
Each of the thin children picked a bouquet of bright flowers,
mostly the blossoms of the yellow rhododendron, nektamuk,
but also red ginger, eroaloali, the small white rhododendron,
wamasi, with its sweet spicy smell, a burmannia, le, which
is a strange pale blue, and two varieties of ground orchid,
one small and purple, the other large and brown and white
and lavender.
The girls carried their flowers for a little while, strolling
down through the coolness of the evergreens by the spring
of Homuak. Above, the war kains sat around the council
fire, against the wall of fern, and the children stood apart,
pressed to the trees. Small bellies and behinds sticking out,
the flowers clasped in hands folded neatly on their skirts
of reed, they stared at the fierce old men. Word had come
that a woman of the enemy had drowned in the Baliem.
Women's suicide in the Baliem occurs from time to time,
but the cause of this death was unknown. The death of a
woman was not the same as the death of a man, but it was
glad tidings all the same.
The children went up onto the hill again. They did not
know quite why they had picked the flowers, which were
• 125

of no use or consequence, and, looking at one another, they
began to giggle, putting their hands into their mouths. Then
Aku and Eken and Werekma picked their bouquets to pieces,
and, because it rained during that night, the fallen blossoms
were still living the next day.

• The time of the full moon is past, and a slow rain
has come again, filling the valley sky with pale gray clouds.
With the rain's return, the fresh air of the southeast trades
has died away, and the yellow gardenia is all but gone. The
Aike River, bony with derelict trees after the dry spell, is
speckled with large flocks of fledgling ducks, and the wood
swallows, their nesting done, come in small flocks to the
araucarias.
Weaklekek and his wife went up into the mountains,
to the oak forest and beyond, in search of fresh lisanika
leaves for his tobacco. Most of the other men worked in
the fields, though Tegearek, glad of the distraction, spent
much of the morning chasing a small snake up and down
the ditch of someone else's garden, shouting and thrashing
as if his life depended on it. His own new garden, though
begun at the same time, has fallen far behind the garden of
Werene.
Ekali of Wuperainma left on a trading journey to the
Yali people, four days northeastward of the valley; he and
his companions carried with them nets and stone adzes and
will return within a fortnight with fine bird feathers.
Ekali took the mountain trail which climbs from the
126 •

valley floor, two hours away in the northern Kurelu; it continues past the salt wells at Iluerainma, over the ridge, and
into the Pass Valley, and from there in a three-day journey
to the Yali Valley, called the Yalimo. The Yalimo, unlike
the Baliem—the latter, in the dimensions of its broad, level
plain, is unique in all the highlands—is steep and is still
forested; therefore the Yali peoples have remained skilled
hunters. Shifting agriculture is still the common practice: the
gardens are less expert than those in the Baliem, and the
pigs fewer.
The Baliem tribes depend on the Yali peoples for certain articles which have vanished, in their own lands, with
the destruction of the forests. The Yali supplies the great
bulk of the fine decorative feathers, including plumes of the
various birds of paradise. The furs come also from the Yali:
such creatures as the cuscus and tree kangaroo, whose pelts
adorn the crowns and armlets and horims, are now so scarce
even in the upper forests of the rim that only one old man
of Sulaki still goes in the nights of the full moon to hunt them.
Certain woods which must once have flourished in the Baliem
are now imported from the Yali, including the bial wood of
the beautiful white spears, the wio, a fine dark bow wood,
and many others. The handsome spear laurel, though it still
occurs in the Baliem, is cut as fast as it is found; it will soon
vanish from the cloud forests of the rim, and already the best
laurel spears come from across the mountains.
In exchange for articles of feathers, fur, and wood, the
Kurelu bring stone adzes, shell goods, pigs, and woven articles.
Yeke Asuk only quite recently has acquired from the Yah
people an opossum crown and a fine spear sapling in exchange for an adze and other articles; the fur alone required
an adze in payment. The green and black stone of the adzes,
used also in the holy stones, does not come from the Baliem,
• 127

where it is unknown; it arrives there by an obscure set of
trade routes, probably over the mountains from the eastward, and may well originate some hundreds of miles and
many years away, in the far volcanic ranges of Papua. The
shells, in turn, pass along from tribe to tribe, over trade
routes from the southern coast; the coast is far away, beyond
the experience of the akuni, who have no comprehension of
the sea. The shells are the chief medium of exchange and
travel endlessly, in a series of slow transfers, pausing in a
pilai here, a shell belt there, for a month, a decade, or a
century, only to pass onward from brown hand to hand.

Uwar and Kabilek are expert at a game called
sikoko, which is played with rattan hoops and small cane
spears; the boys keep their own hoops among their few
possessions in the pilai. Though games are numerous, toys
kept by the children from one day to the next are few. They
include a bull-roarer—a slat of wood on the end of a string,
which produces, when whirled, a loud hollow noise—a simple
swing in which a vine is lashed to the middle of a board,
and the large purple bulb of the banana tree, also on a string:
the latter may be twirled in the air below the hand or towed
on the ground behind, a technique favored by Uwar's small
round brother, Natorek.
The rules of sikoko are simple, but the game is difficult.
One boy rolls the hoops one after another across a length
of ground, and, as they pass, the other must hurl the spears
through them in such a way that the spear sticks into the
128 •

ground with the hoop spinning on it. The hoops are hurled
at full force, so that they bounce high and erratically as they
go, but even so, the boys do not miss often. Unlike most
other yegerek, who crowd the hoop and try to punch the
spear through at the last second, Uwar and Kabilek keep a
distance and impale the hoop with a whipping sidearm
throw; Uwar is the only boy who is left-handed. Sometimes they bounce the hoops over the araucaria roots
at Homuak, and sometimes they play on a downhill path
below Wuperainma; at these times they are watched by
Natorek and Oluma, who work as a pair under the direction
of the former. Both little boys are fat and strong and truculent
—at three, they are as old as fat men ever get among the
akuni—and do everything not only together but simultaneously. Today, when Natorek marched into the weeds and
squatted, Oluma took up a position right beside him; shoulder to shoulder, they relieved their small bodies in unison,
neat and quick as birds, the pair of heads glaring balefully
at the world across the grass tops.
The nostrils and upper lips of both Oluma and Natorek,
like those of almost all the children and a number of adults
as well, are chronically encrusted with dried mucus—the
symptom of the one common ailment, a respiratory infection,
in an otherwise strong, healthy, and clear-skinned people.
Suspended mucus, rising and falling casually, is a feature of
the akuni face, since hawking and spitting and blowing the
nose are considered very rude.
Unlike Oluma and Natorek, Uwar and Kabilek are beautiful, in the large-eyed, carved-featured way of certain akuni,
though the wild brightness in Uwar's face is replaced, in
Kabilek, by wistful sadness; Kabilek appears to long for something he will never know.
As the only yegerek in U-mue's sili, Uwar and Kabilek
• 129

are together often, but they are in no way alike and could
not really be called friends. Each time they play sikoko the
game ends uncomfortably, for while Kabiiek is gentle and
resigned, Uwar burns with a quiet ferocity and works himself to a pitch of intensity in which, smiling still in a cold,
glittering way, he contrives to disrupt the game. He hurls
the hoops when Kabiiek is not ready, or plays carelessly,
in languid contempt, and finally he may hurl the hoop at
his opponent or at one of the children looking on. At these
moments he is beside himself, there is no real communication with him. The other children, and the adults as well,
greet Uwar with deference, for he is quite exceptional, but
he is not well liked. Uwar was born to lead and has small
need for friendship.
Uwar is named for the Uwar River, which flows through
the land of the Siep-Kosi, where he was born; later his mother
came to the land of the Kurelu and married Loliluk. The
latter is deceptive in appearance, a small timid-looking man
in an old brown head net, puttering about the sili. Loliluk
never wears shells or feathers and moves quietly. Nevertheless, he is said to have killed five, two of these on the occasion
on which he received his present name. The name, which
means "Bones Ungathered," commemorates the day when,
a daughter having died, he rushed away into the mountains
even before the funeral was finished and there, in a region
beyond Lokoparek, then in enemy territory, killed two people
in a fit of grief.
Ekali, father of Kabiiek, is also deceptive in appearance.
He is a tall man with a strong voice, strong face, but in fact
he is uncertain of himself, afraid in war, yet unresigned to
his own fear, a blusterer. At one time Ekali moved away
to the Siep-Kosi, where in one way or another he made himself so unpopular that he was called Lan-i—"Go There," in
130 •

the sense of "Go on Back to Your Own People." His new
name, awarded since his return, describes the reaction of
his young wife to his habit of gobbling up the best bits of
food before the food leaves the cooking shed, rather than
sharing it in the pilai with the other men; Ekali means
"Shame."
Though Ekali is intelligent, and has gained a certain
wealth in pigs as a result of trading journeys to the Yali
people, his ambiguous reputation may put his son Kabiiek
at a disadvantage in regard to Uwar.

• 131

Yesterday the Wittaia asked for war, but the
Kurelu, anxious to work their fields, refused it. Today the
enemy staged a garden raid, to revenge the one in which
Huwai had been killed. By midday a large party of them had
crept to the belt of woods which separates U-mue's kaio
from the Tokolik. Women were scattered through the fields,
but none came near the ambush point. In the late afternoon, exasperated, the Wittaia rushed out and set fire to
U-mue's shelter, then retired to the Tokolik. Their jeering
howl was answered by the Kurelu, and warriors ran for the
frontier; U-mue himself was at Homuak and at the first alarm
leapt to his feet, screeching maniacally. Somehow he had
grasped from the discordant shouts that the shelter was his
own, for the prospect of battle does not ordinarily excite
him; he ran off to fetch his spear. Others were already on
their way. The young warriors ran in files along the paths
among the purple sweet potatoes, among them Yeke Asuk,
whose pale brown form among the dark bodies of the other
men was luminous in the failing light.
An audience of yegerek scrambled up the grassy slope
behind the araucarias. Tukum, on the way, was stung on
the foot by a bee. He sat down on a rock like a sad troll and
clutched at the foot. Behind him, Uwar located the small beehive in the grass: it was gray and papery and had white
larvae in it. Without giving a bite to its discoverer, Uwar
popped the hive into his mouth and ate it, rubbing his stomach
in satisfaction.
Against the dusk the fire plume of the burning shelter
was bright, and its white smoke rose toward the wreath of
cloud at the peak of Arolik.
132 •

The warriors picked their way uneasily through the
wood toward the Tokolik; they knew that the reeds might
conceal the waiting enemy. A mokoko heron rose like a gray
shade, venting its grim croak, as other men came on from
the Liberek. Fighting broke out immediately, to fierce howling, and from the distance the white feathers could be seen
between the trees, spinning disembodied in the gathering
darkness. There were nearly one hundred Wittaia, and though
the skirmish lasted but a few minutes, they wounded four of
the outnumbered Kurelu. At dark both sides withdrew, for
dark is the hour of the ghosts; the Wittaia built a high, bright
fire at the east end of the Tokolik but deserted it after a
short while and continued homeward.
The man of the Kosi-Alua speared in the last moon by
Tegearek and Yeke Asuk was speared again, this time along
the side of his neck. Yeke Asuk, fighting nearby, was arrowed
in the back. The arrow was removed by Aloro, but a short
time later Aloro himself was wounded in the front part of
his thigh. Aloro is wounded more often than any other warrior, not because he is careless or reckless but because he
never leaves the battle line. One day he will be wounded
mortally.
Two days later the Wittaia appeared in battle array
again, having moved boldly to the wooded strip between
the Tokolik and the shell of U-mue*s shelter. Again the
Kurelu went out to meet them, though not nearly numerous enough to fight. They gathered watchfully at the
end of the Tokolik, while opposite them several hundred
of the enemy massed in ranks. Weaklekek, Asikanalek, and
Husuk circled apprehensively among the few young warriors who moved out to face the taunting party of Wittaia;
more Wittaia lined the Waraba. A brief skirmish took place
in which Husuk threw and lost his fine dark spear; annoyed,
he walked around in the front line without a weapon, hands
• 133

folded behind his back. Plainly the Kurelu were waiting for
the rain, which swept in dense palls along the northeast
mountains; the men gave way in spite of Maitmo, who ran
forward to rally them, screeching with his usual belligerence.
A party of Wittaia had crept through the swamp from
the Waraba and appeared suddenly on the flank; a roar
broke out, and the Kurelu fled. The Wittaia did not press
them. Light airs from the west swung around and freshened,
bearing the rain out of the north; the north wind is a rare
cold wind, and both tribes withdrew, hugging their shoulders.
Asukwan of Homaklep returned by way of Homuak.
Like a little boy, using excited jabbing motions, he described
to foolish Woknabin his own deeds of heroism. Woknabin,
still lame from two arrow wounds suffered on the Tokolik,
listened to Asukwan's tale with awe. Woknabin is a huge
kindly man, blind in one eye and simple; he is a brave warrior and a poor one. Woknabin's name was given in childhood; he was terrified, each time his mother left the sili,
that she would go away from him forever. His name, which
suits the sad entreaty in his face, means "Take Me with
You."

The arrow which struck Yeke Asuk entered near
his right shoulder blade and penetrated toward the center
of his chest, causing injury to the etai-eken—literally, the
"seed of singing"—the life energy, the soul. The etai-eken,
which occurs near the region of the diaphragm, varies in
size according to the spiritual progress of each person, but
it is always present except in smallest infants. Pigs also
have etai-eken, but dogs and other animals have none.
134 •

The belly of Yeke Asuk was cut with a bamboo knife
in several places to drain off the "black blood," and the
vein of his arm punctured with a pig-bone needle, after
which he was bound up tightly in a poultice of taro leaves.
He slept well but this morning was in severe pain. He was
helped down from the sleeping loft, and many men came
to see him. Tuesike helped Yeke Asuk to a sitting position
and, with loud Huonke, applied wet leaves of hiperi to the
arrow hole and to the bleeding wound, binding him tight
again with gleaming purple strips of fresh banana leaf. Yeke
Asuk's wound is serious, but not serious enough to justify
the catching and killing of small animals.
Outside, squatting in the smoke of a yard fire, U-mue
made fetishes for his brother. Yeke Asuk was not well
enough to come out, and Uwar and Kabilek, each holding
a fetish high in the air, ran back and forth before the entrance of the pilai. Then they fled away down the yard,
holding the canes high between them in a kind of arch.
Both fetishes were planted outside the village, by the paths
leading toward Wittaia land. Like the fetish made for
Tuesike, they were intended to warn away unfriendly spirits.
The women's life, and that of the pigs and children,
trudged ahead. Hiperi and toa, a large succulent grass, were
cooking in the shed, and the smoke rose through the dark
wet straw the whole length of the roof. Ekapuwe had come
down the night before from Lokoparek and was greeting the
visitors in a cheery manner. Holake, a little girl with rusty
rag-doll hair, stood pigeon-toed and proud, hands clasped
tightly on the headband of her net; in the net was Ekapuwe's
new baby. From time to time Holake walked it up and down
the yard, and the invisible child, which has passed most
of its life to date within the net, murmured contentedly, a
pale finger poking outward toward the sun like a small
tendril. Beside Holake marched her small fat brother Oluma,
• 135

who is Natorek's friend and double. Holake and Oluma are
the children of Wereklowe; their mother came long ago
to live in U-mue's sili, because of excessive beatings administered by her husband. The mother looks older than she is,
but at moments she smiles the same shy merry smile as her
ragtag little girl. Though she is said to be the woman of
Yeke Asuk, she did not seem in the least upset about her
lover's peril.
A yellow hog barged forth from the gourd garden. It
snuffed, tail wagging, among the vegetable skins and husks
cast out before the pilai and consumed a discarded butt
of sweet potato with loud, chopping relish, contemptuous
of all the world beyond its mouth. As it ate, it cocked a small
evil eye, more hke a sore, on guard against the man or pig
who might attempt to interfere with its ingestion.
Some large hiperi were handed from the cooking shed,
and the men returned into the pilai to consume them. Polik
had come and took advantage of the visit to appraise a
fine cowrie belt; he stretched it around the fireplace. In the
corner Hanumoak, reaching for his shell bib hanging on the
wall, saw the larger bib which belongs to Yeke Asuk and
tried it on. He was watched by Huonke, who, caught watching, smiled his furtive smile, and Hanumoak returned the
smile, though coldly. He removed the shell bib of the wounded
man and tied on his own.

One afternoon Weaklekek obtained a fine small
pig. Pigs are normally not eaten without ceremonial reason,
but a reason was found, as it often is, and in the afternoon
136 •

Weaklekek drove an arrow into the pig's lungs. The pig
ran squalling around the yard, but in a little while it was
caught again, and Palek stood with his foot upon it until
it died.
Weaklekek singed the pig on a fire in the cooking shed.
He dressed it out, with the help of Asok-meke, on a bed of
fern, cutting it up with a bamboo knife and a small stone
adze. Asok-meke drew the tripes out from the viscera and
handed them to the boy Supuk, who took them to the stream
to wash them.
Weaklekek's wife Lakaloklek, farther down the long
hall of the shed, had built a large fire to heat rocks. Lakaloklek's old mother sat alone in the dense smoke like a
brown bundle, as if, after so many years, smoke had replaced
air as her natural element; she watched the dressing of the
pig with the slack avidity of old age. The women were
joined by Weaklekek's youngest wife, just in from the fields;
she swung her nets of gourds and hiperi into the corner.
She also swung down her daughter, placing her next to the
old woman. The little girl is the favorite of Weaklekek and
wears two pretty cowries and a string of snails. The old
woman stroked the child and showed to it a baby piglet
which she carried with her in her own bottomless net. Then
the young wife, returning, took the baby from her. While
the child sucked at her breast, the mother smoked, using
the long holder; her chin rested on the baby's head.
Supuk returned, bringing the tripe, but Lakaloklek sent
him out again to put the pigs into their stalls; the child went
promptly, without grumbling. Lakaloklek and the young
wife, with the mother of Supuk, were whirling like three
witches in the smoke, hair and breasts flying: they took up
the heated stones with long stick tongs and placed them
in the pit.
Lakaloklek is elfin and pretty in appearance, though
• 137

she wears a smear of black grease across her face and her
hair hangs down across her eyes. She is gay and quick in
all her movements, in no way oppressed by her woman's life.
Supuk's mother is a big woman with the plaintive jollity of
middle years, and the young wife, who can't yet be fifteen,
is graceful and big-breasted, complete in the thick torpid
way of a fleshy, unopened flower. From the inferno of the
smoke, the three women laughed.
Originally this young wife was to have married Supuk's
father, but, arriving in the sili for the first time, she fell in
love immediately with Weaklekek; when she refused to go
to Palek, Weaklekek accepted her philosophically into his
household. Palek, having small choice in the matter, was
philosophical about it also.
Palek's son Wamatue appeared, a diminutive boy with
red hair; the red hair, of a deep rust color, is typical of the
children and glows like a halo on their dark heads when
the sun is low, toward twilight. Wamatue wore fern bracelets on his wrists, and a miniature horim. The horim was the
diameter of an arrow, too small even for Wamatue; it hung
in a token way in the area of his navel. Wamatue is a shy
sort of creature and stood camouflaged in the brown shadows
by the entrance, thinking long thoughts, but finally his presence was remarked upon, and he came forward.
For nearly an hour the pig steamed with fine redolence,
and in this time the chortling of the honey eaters in the
casuarina trees around the village gave way to the rigid
twilight chant of huge cicadas. Weaklekek sat off to one
side, holding his baby daughter on his lap; he squeezed her
in inarticulate delight, and once he placed his lips against
her head in a sort of mute instinctive kiss. Weaklekek is
ashamed of nothing, and the great life in him shines outward, with nothing withheld behind the eyes.
Asukwan, lank and indolent, arrived in time to help
138 •

take the browned thatch from the fire. When this was done
he sat down to one side to await his dinner. Wamatue sat
next to him, shoulder to shoulder, and Asukwan punched the
little boy playfully on the back. Wamatue cried out, seeking
attention from his mother. His mother did not bother with
him, and he stopped.
The food was laid on fresh banana fronds: except for
the sliver knife of bamboo and a concave length of bark
which serves as a sort of tray for discarded scraps, there
are no utensils of any kind. Though clays of several colors
are common in the valley, the art of pottery has not been
learned; the people are content with their string nets, leaf
packets, and small water gourds.
Stern Asok-meke, the guest, divided up the meat. The
men were given the best pieces, while the women, sitting
separately in the darkness, were passed a few poor scraps.
The tripes Asok-meke slung disdainfully at the yegerek, who
also ate some of the bloodied ferns used in the cooking: all
the household consumed hiperi and toa and the spinach-like
leaves of mallow, eaten with gray salt from the wells at
Iluerainma: the precious salt was sprinkled carefully from
a long tube of banana leaf. They ate in silence, without greed
or haste.
When the men had retired to the pilai, and the women
to the huts across the way, Lakaloklek remained seated by
the embers, weaving a new net; the fiber stretched in a long
band from her stump fingers to her toes, vibrated by old
rhythms of her hands. As she worked she hummed and smiled,
at peace in her own world. But soon she too retired, and the
fire died.
The sky of night was high with stars shining on
other centuries beyond the mountains. This was the time of
the night feeding, the nocturnal animals, creeping forth in
the last flickers of man's embers. In the shed rats and mice
• 139

came from the walls with their tight squeakings, and bats
on fingered wings flopped to the village—the tiny twilight
bat, with its high ascending shriek, and the flying fox, which
did not cry but sounded its coming with the quaking flaps
of five-foot wings. The bats circled beneath the stars, in
the ringing of the tree frogs and the crickets. In the light
wind of night weather, the banana fronds stirred with a
loud, lonely clacking, and the great dog-faced bats pumped
back and forth, thump, thump-thump, thump, to their rude
landings on the hanging fruit.
As the night grew, the feeding hour declined, and cold
descended from the mountains; the bats vanished, and the
rodents withdrew to their dank passages. Even the mosquitoes
sought their corners, to shrivel in the dim, dry sleep of insects.
The soft voices in the pilai died, and Weaklekek came
out alone, to visit Lakaloklek in her ebeai. The earth turned
beneath the stars, and Weaklekek cried out in the night, a
pure, sweet cry of pain, and all was quiet.
The nightjar, done with its wide-mouthed hunt for insects, grunted digestively in the black evergreens. Slowly
it began its hollow, metronomic tok, tok . . . tok, and the
sound wore away the night. Weaklekek came from the ebeai
and went into the cooking shed, where he drew a fire from
the straw to warm himself and smoke. With his fingers he
worked his swollen calf where an arrow tip, broken off, was
deep embedded. Of late this old wound had given him much
pain.
At first light a dusky green emerged slowly from the
gray, and the surrounding woods took shape. Somewhere,
on a limb, the nightjar ruffled its loose feathers and blinked
its yellow eye; camouflaged like a great moth, it would grow
into the wood until night came again. Its place was taken
by the honey eater, for this was the morning-of-bird-voices.
Weaklekek, at his small fire, sighed. He squatted there
immobile, his silhouette like a statue of black igneous rock
140 •

against the transient flickering on the walls. A woman came,
and they spoke gently to each other, but she moved off to
her own shadows and built up her own fire. When it flamed,
she took sweet potatoes from a net slumped by the wall and
stacked them against the embers.
A mountain pigeon called, and day appeared.

• Tukum, that morning, found a bird's nest in a
pink-flowered myrtle tree. The nest was a miniature cup
of soft grass, circled around with bright green sphagnum
moss. There were two tiny birds in it, olive and yellow, and,
though they had never done so before Tukum found them,
they could be made to flutter for short distances.
Tukum carried the nest about all morning, making the
little birds fly; they would buzz along on a downward angle,
careening inevitably into the ground. The birds delighted
Tukum, who talked to them and encouraged them, but he
had no recognition of his feehng, any more than Aku and
Eken and Werekma had understood why they had picked
their flowers. Late in the day he would take them home and
eat them.
•

141

High in the dark cloud forests of the upper Elokera stands a huge beech, and high in this tree hangs a
ponderous nest of the great black hawk. Weaklekek wished
to obtain this hawk, the feathers of which are valuable, and
he set off with his bow and arrow to investigate the nest,
the news of which had spread down to the valley. With him
he took Asukwan, the young warrior of his pilai, who is
credited with a sense of birds and a keen eye. They were
accompanied by Tukum, who is credited with almost nothing.
The three went up the valley along the stream bed of
a tributary, wading the quiet pools under the banks and
leaping from rock to mossy rock; honey eaters and birds of
paradise shrieked at their passing, and mountain pigeons,
veering off, broke the humid airs with the sharp clap of
pigeon wings. Farther on, they took to high ground, crossing abandoned fields; in the hillside woods small flocks of
parakeets, red under wing, criss-crossed the treetops in loud
senseless consternation.
At a place along the trail the grass was crushed and
flattened; Asukwan laughed. He poked the forefinger of one
hand back and forth between the second and third fingers
of the other, and Weaklekek grinned. Tukum, embarrassed,
grinned as well.
In the forest of the upper slopes, with its black mud
and thorned rattan, its hanging shapes and gloom, the pale
clear boles of the canopy trees soared to crests which closed
away the sky; the trail crossed sagging pig fences, and hidden
animals grunted hollowly from the shadows of these dark
pastures. The trail skirted dismal wells where the limestone
had caved in; one well was a hundred feet or more in depth,
and strongly fenced around, though the fence was water142 •

logged and rotten. Asukwan tossed a stone into the well,
and the three exclaimed at the time which passed before
the splash resounded. Lagging behind, Tukum tossed another stone, but this time a sound came back immediately,
for Tukum's stone, barely clearing the edge, had fallen on
a ledge inside the rim. Tukum glared balefully at the well
and trotted onward.
Farther still, in a steep clearing, lay a new pig village,
perched on a ledge of mud. Here miniature blue butterflies
fluttered like gentian petals, alighting as one on the mud's
black gleam and all but vanishing, for with closed wings
they were nothing more than small scraps of drab gray. Then
the blue color would explode again as the butterflies danced
in their odd motion. Tukum laughed, pronouncing their apt
name—sigisigit.

At the village a man joined them, and the four went
on to the high forest above. A black hawk soared in the
gray cloud which hung upon the forest, and Weaklekek
whispered at it, making gestures, in order that it circle
lower. But the hawk slid off and disappeared, and its nest,
when they came to the base of the tree, had no bird at its
edge. Weaklekek crept higher on the slope but could not
attain the nest level. After a while he came down again and,
on the way home, out of frustration, wasted an old arrow
in a shot at one of the green parakeets.

The season turned, and the night was clear and
cold. The akuni kept to their warm huts until the morning
was well started, and out in the crisp air built high brush
• 143

fires. The brush was of dead sticks and dry brown leaves,
and around a large fire built under the pines the air sparkled
with autumn; light filtered down in long delicate columns
onto the fallen needles. But in the undergrowth just at the
wood edge the sun was hot, and the bushes flowered in the
rich green of the valley's ceaseless spring.
Once or twice a year, depending on its current fortunes,
a clan will hold a ceremony which renews the power of the
holy stones and invigorates and protects in battle the warriors of the clan that holds the stones: the cleaning of the
stones with grease of ceremonial pig, wam wisa, is the most
sacred of all rituals practiced by the akuni.
In early June a stone ceremony was held by the clan
Wilil, in the small village which adjoins Abulopak. Because
this place is more safely located than Wuperainma, which
lies close to the frontier, the ancestral stones are still maintained there. They are entrusted to the care of big Woknabin,
the only Wilil warrior left in the pilai.
As political kain of the southern Wilil, the man most
important in the ceremony is U-mue. He came to the sili
in the middle of the morning, bringing three of the pigs
that would be slaughtered. He was accompanied by Weaklekek, and on the way past Abulopak he stopped by to invite Wereklowe and Polik. None of these men are Wilil,
but the feast is attended by kains, relatives, leading warriors,
and boys of all the other clans, depending upon their significance and kinship.
Other Wilil were arriving at the sili, and a period of
greeting and singing began, in which a crying takes place
very like the windy sound of mourning. The crying lasted
ten or fifteen minutes and was followed by excited chatter:
this part of the ceremony is designed to bury feuds or ill
feeling within the clan itself, and to restore an atmosphere
of friendship.
144 •

Behind the pilai, Aloro and other men cleared all
weeds and refuse from a special yard, using digging sticks
to scrape the earth. The yard is a pretty and sequestered
place, shaded by banana trees and casuarina and pandanus.
All morning large hiperi had been brought in, and wood
and cooking stones and leaves. Ekali brought a pig, and
Apeore and others brought bundles of split timbers; they
marched in procession through the sili and stacked the wood
under the trees in the small yard. Old cooking pits were
cleared and new ones dug. Loliluk appeared and went into
the pilai, followed by old Elomaholan. Elomaholan wore his
usual array of fur bits and small bags; only the old men
carry such bags, which are slung at the waist from a fiber
shoulder strap. Elomaholan's voice is high and squeaky,
scarcely audible, and he is prey to the young warriors, who
sneak up behind him on the paths and shout Wittaia shouts.
Elomaholan is a wisakun, or "medicine man": the wisakuns,
in addition to their medical duties, supervise the rituals pertaining to the holy stones.
U-mue, freshly greased for the occasion, returned into
the pilai from the yard, and the sobbing of greeting was
resumed. He would utter a phrase, and Wereklowe and the
rest would join it at the end, carrying it onward in a soft
dying wail. All held their fingers to the bridges of their noses,
snuffling wetly.
The pilai itself is small and old and littered as a witch's
den. Dark packets cling to all the walls and rafters, and
strange-shaped gourds and long straw bundles, old arrows
and feathers; the ceiling shines with black accumulated
grease. It is no longer a pilai of warriors, all its strongest
men having long since moved away. Some years ago the
Wilil were having trouble with the other clans living at
Abulopak, and U-mue felt it time, in any case, to start a
new sili of his own, as a mark of power. Most of the Wilil
• 145

It was carried up the yard at last, big dewlaps quaking, its
bloodied bristles stiffening in the sun. There were nine pigs
in all. Each pig was earmarked, and each man in the company of more than fifty knew not only who had brought them
but exactly which was which; they had a very good idea,
as well, as to which piece of which pig each man would
receive, for the akuni world is a world of protocol and gesture,
and those details not preordained by time are painstakingly
determined at the slow small fires.
The sow was a long time at the fire, hoisted and
kicked and rolled and scraped by Apeore and Tegearek. The
dressing of the eight small pigs was already in progress, with
two or three men working on each. U-mue stood regally
above his people as they bent over their work, the new clay
like yellow gold on his black shoulders.
While the pig-dressing proceeded, the sili became quiet
once again. Voices drifted from the shadows, to the fitful
chopping of stone adze on bone. Behind the pilai, in the
yard, a large fire was constructed, Like a pyre: here the
cooking stones were piled and heated. From the steep hill
above the sili men rolled more rocks down the hill; the
rocks rumbled through the woods.
Behind the fire, under a pandanus, a small fencing guards
the spirits of the dead. The fencing was replaced now with
new laths, and its earth weeded and tamped down, to show
the spirits that they are not neglected. In the center of the
fencing stands a pole of cane with dried ferns attached;
this is a warning sign, to indicate that the place must not
be violated.
On a rack by the pilai Aloro and Tegearek hung bloody
slabs of meat. The hands of both warriors were crimson,
and when they were through they drank water from a gourd
and wiped their hands with ferns.
Apeore stood in the cooking pit, covering its earthen
• 147

sides with long fresh grass; the strands of grass fanned outward several feet from the edge, until the pit looked like a
gigantic blossom. Wet leaves were placed around the rim,
like a bright green heart of the grass flower; nearby lay
purple hiperi. The rock fire popped loudly as a stone exploded; the stones were seized and borne away in tongs
to line the pit, mounting the sides until an igneous center
had been formed. The stones were covered with wet grass,
and the big hiperi laid in the steam. U-mue appeared and
shouted orders, but in the general exhilaration everyone else
was shouting orders too. The voices meant nothing; everyone worked hard and willingly, with swift efficiency. The
hiperi were brought, and more wet grass; the rock fire rose
above the ground. More stones were laid into the core, while
Polik and others wove the grass sides tight: Polik does not
hesitate to work side by side with the warriors, or even the
yegerek, though he is an older and a greater kain than U-mue.
The tong men came and went, grunting like penitents; they
moved mechanically from pit to fire, fire to pit, their six-foot
implements clacking dismally on the rocks. On the pit's edge
Apeore sprang about, demonic in the steam.
More stones, more leaves, and a large packet of ceremonial pig, wrapped in banana leaf. And still more stones.
The stones exploded and a fragment burned hard-faced
Huonke, who cried out. More grass, and now a heap of fern,
brought forward in huge bundles and sprinkled with water
from a sunlit gourd. Tegearek ran forward with the raw
sow hide, heaving it flesh down onto the ferns. More pig
meat was arranged around it, in fern packets. More stones,
more ferns, more silver water, sparkling in the sunlight—
and a cry passed on from a distant kaio. Kaio, kaio, a man
shouted, and there was a brief stir, but no one left the feast:
today the other clans must take care of the enemy.
148 •

The grass extending outward from the pit was folded
upward, enveloping the whole, and the entire edifice, like
a small haystack, was bound around with a long coil of
rattan. The finished job was handsome and compact, the
product of uncounted years of practice; the voices had been
profligate, but scarcely a gesture had been wasted.
Aloro removed the spare meat from the rack and hung
it in the pilai; it would be eaten in the ceremonies of the
second day. Nilik came, walking quietly up the yard: the
name Nilik derives from this man's lifelong knack for finding
himself in the vicinity of pig-eating. There is something
ominous in Nilik's hungry presence, and his arrival seemed
foreshadowed by the clouding-over of the sun. The west
wind freshened, and the skeletal fronds rising above the
roofs stirred in hollow, ruined apprehension. He greeted,
unsmiling, Asikanalek and other men who passed him in
the yard; they were taking advantage of the cooking time
to go and investigate what had happened at the kaios.
The rock fire was stripped in the late afternoon, and
the browned ferns spread out in a great mat before the pilai.
More than one hundred men had now assembled, and most
of them sat in a circle around the ferns. Many of the ferns
were eaten, and on the rest the pig meat was arranged. The
fatty skin of the large sow was hoisted up, and U-mue sliced
it in thin strips: these were passed to the individuals and
groups deserving them, and there was no sign of quarreling,
for each knew and received his share. The warriors ate the
meat with gusto but without haste or greed, saving some
of the hot lard next to the hide to rub on their own skins.
The grease of the ceremonial pig is beneficial in every way,
providing both strength and good appearance; by the end
of the afternoon the dark skins were gleaming.
The sow rump and other special cuts had been taken
• 149

into the pilai, where U-mue and the old kains had disappeared; there a bundle of new fiber strings, worn at the
throat to protect the men in war, were rubbed in wisa grease.
The fibers were dispensed to warriors like Yeke Asuk, whose
recent wound, a serious one, indicated his need of new protection; Yeke Asuk handed some spare strings through the
door, and the men outside grasped at them eagerly.
In the rear of the pilai the holy stones, still wrapped,
lay in a line on the banana leaf. The following morning, the
cleansing of the stones was to take place. Noisily, in the neardarkness of the hut, the old men ate, while behind them,
slung from the rafters, the raw meat dripped cold blood,
turning slowly against the chinks of light.

150 •

For several days the Wittaia, unable to effect a
death in battle or in their field raids from the Tokolik, had
attempted a raid near the river, coming across early in the
morning from the Turaba. The akuni were aware of this,
and Weaklekek's kaio had been strengthened by Aloro, Husuk,
and other warriors, who attempted to ambush the raiders;
despite several alarms, no real battle had occurred.
This morning the men did not go to the kaio, for the
feast of the Wilil was taking place. Aloro was an important
Wilil, Weaklekek an important guest, and Husuk went off
to war on the north frontier. No women were permitted
in Weaklekek's fields, and the kaio was abandoned for the
day. The Aike frontier, with the looming Turaba, had always
been a dangerous place, and as Weaklekek's absence, like
all other important matters, was common knowledge, no
trouble was expected.
But the day was hot, and in the afternoon the solitary
Woluklek went to the river to drink water. The people tire
of the stale, silted waters of the ditches—they have no
drink but water—and in dry weather will often go a long
way to the river, where they squat on the bank and drink
slowly and steadily for minutes. Woluklek took with him
three little boys who were playing near Mapiatma.
One of the boys was Weake, whose father had been
killed the year before on the Waraba. His mother had since
run off to the Wittaia, and Weake was now the ward of his
uncle, the warrior Huonke. He was a small yegerek, a friend
of Tukum, with the large eyes and thick eyebrows which
make many of the children beautiful. His name meant "Bad
Path," and recently he had hurt his leg. For this reason, on
this day, he was slower than his friends.
• 151

Near the Aike, on a little rise just short of the side path
to Weaklekek's kaio, Woluklek and the three boys were ambushed by a party of Wittaia; the raiders sprang from the
low reeds and bushes. Afterward Woluklek was not sure
about their numbers, but a raiding party is usually comprised
of about thirty men. There was nothing to be done. He
dropped his spear and fled, the boys behind him.
All his life Weake had been taught to hate and fear the
enemy, and when he saw the strange men with their spears
he turned with the rest and ran. But he was not fast enough
and was almost immediately run down. He screamed for help,
but the others were running for their lives and did not turn.
The face of a man, of several men, loomed above him on the
bright blue sky, with harsh, loud breathing. The men rammed
their spears through him over and over, pinning him to the
ground, and then they were gone, and Weake was carried
home.
The cry of Kaio, kaio carried swiftly past Homuak and
to the pig feast: the hot stone fragment that had burned
Huonke must have struck him close to the same instant that
his nephew had been pierced by the long spears. While the
rock fire was still steaming, word came from Abulopak about
the boy. The two villages almost adjoin, and the pilai where
Weake lived was scarcely a hundred yards across the fences
from the Wilil fire. Huonke and Tamugi, his brother-in-law,
ran toward Abulopak, where the women's wailing had already started.
In the long yard of the sili two women were kneeling,
facing the mute pilai. The sili lies under the mountain, at
the north end of the great grove of araucaria, and the pilai
at its southern end is shaded by the tall pines against the hill.
Inside the pilai were a few old men, and then Asikanalek
arrived, and Tamugi and Huonke, and Siloba.
Weake lay on a banana frond beside the fire. He was
152 •

still alive, and his clear childish voice seemed out of place
in the brown solemnity of the men's round house: it cut
through the decrepit snuffling of the old men as the shaft
of daylight in the doorway cut through the motes of dust.
Weake spoke of his own etai-eken, his seed-of-singing, the
life he clung to with all his strength, as if the mourning
he could hear must be some dark mistake. An etai-eken werek!
But I'm alive! Though he not once screamed or whined, his
voice was broken as he spoke by little calls of pain, and the
blood flowed steadily onto the frond beneath him.
Huonke tried to quiet him, repeating the same terse
phrase over and over, like a chant: Hat nahalok loguluk! Hat
nahalok loguluk!—But you're not going to die! Huonke's voice
was the only firm one in the pilai. Tamugi, a large-muscled
man whose ready smile is bolder than his nature, sobbed as
loudly as he could, while Asikanalek cried silently. The boy's
voice answered Huonke obediently—Oh, oh, he repeated
gently. Yes, yes. But now and then pain or terror overcame
him, and he cried out and fought to escape the death that
he felt in their hands. Huonke held his left arm and Siloba
his right, while Tamugi and Asikanalek held down his legs.
Siloba neither talked nor cried, but breathed earnestly and
ceaselessly into the boy's ear, oo-Phuh, oo-Phuh: this ritual
breathing, which brought health, would be used in the next
hour on the wisa pig meat in the pilai of the Wilil.
Weake twisted in their grasp, his back arching; his legs
were released and he drew his knees up to his chin, covering
the gleam of the neat spear holes at his navel and lower belly.
The old cut on the boy's leg still had its green patch of leaf
dressing, but the spear holes, like small mouths in his chest
and sides, his arm and leg and stomach, had not been tended.
Some fresh leaf was brought at last, and the two stomach
wounds were bound up hastily, almost carelessly, as if the
true purpose of the leaf was to protect the pilai floor from
• 153

blood; in their distress the men handled him ineptly, and he
cried out. The figures hunched over him in the near-darkness,
with the old men's snuffling and the steady oo-Phuh, oo-Phuh,
and the harsh tearing of the leaf.
Behind Huonke, in the shadows, a woman sat as rigid
as a stone. The custom excluding women from the pilai had
been waived while the child lived, but nevertheless she maintained silence: when she spoke, but once, out of the darkness,
her voice came clear and tragic, like a song. The woman was
Huonke's sister, married to Tamugi; she has a wild sad quality
in her face and is one of the handsomest women in the Kurelu.
She counseled the men to take the boy down to the stream.
Weake clung to life and would not die. His writhings
had covered him with blood, and he lay in a pool of darkness.
When the woman finished speaking, the men agreed to take
him to the water, which, entering his wounds, would leach
out the dark blood of illness. He was picked up and carried
outside, Siloba holding his head up by the hair. The women
in the yard began an outcry, but the men did not pass through
the yard. They took Weake through a hole in the back fencing,
across a pig pasture, over a stile, down through a small garden
to a ditch. There they laid him in the muddy water, so that
it lapped up to his chest.
Tamugi did not come. After leaving the pilai with the
other men, he kept on going, for the Wilil fire was now open,
and he wished some pig. The others accompanied Huonke
to the ditch. Soon they too left, for there was nothing to be
done. Only Siloba remained, and his friend Yonokma. Yonokma sat in water up to his waist, holding the legs, while
Huonke and Siloba, their own lower legs submerged, held
the child's arms: Weake's head rested on Huonke's right
thigh.
Fitfully Weake talked and now and then cried out: the
voice rang through the silent garden, against the soft back154 •

ground of lament and the low hum of the men's voices at
the pig feast. Once he cried, Tege! Tege! in terror of the
spears, and Huonke shouted him down: Hat ninom werek!
Hat ninom werek!—over and over and over: You are here
with us, you are here with us! He said this dully every time
Weake called out. You are here with us. Then Weake would
resume his own meek, rhythmic Oh, oh, oh, of assent. Hat
ninom werek—oh. Hat ninom werek—oh. His eyes closed,
opened wide, and closed again; he seemed to doze. In the
muddy ditch, with its water spiders, round black beetles,
and detritus of old leaves, his blood drifted peacefully away.
Against the firmament above soared the great arches of
the banana trees, and the hill crest in a softening light, and
the blue sky. Taro and hiperi grew about him, and the blueflowered spiderwort lined the steep banks. Swiftlets coursed
the garden, hunting insects, and the mosquitoes came; the
men slapped one another.
Huonke sighed and leaned his head against the bank.
In grief, Huonke's face had lost its hard, furtive quality and
become handsome. Yonokma, sitting in the water, yawned
with cold. Okal, who had gone with Weake to the river, came
and stared down at his friend; he looked restless and unhappy
and soon went away again.
In his last sleep Weake cried, a small, pure sound which
came with every breath. When pain awakened him, he tried
to talk, but his voice was faint and drowsy. Siloba breathed
fitfully into his ear, but his efforts were disheartened: he
only did it, guiltily, when the little boy called out. The small
slim body had more than twenty wounds, and the wonder
was that the boy had lived so long. But Weake would live
until the twilight, asleep in the healing water, while the men
attending him grew tired and cold. They coughed and slapped
themselves and stared into the water, and the little boy's
chest twitched up and down, up and down. Sometimes Siloba
• 155

poured water on the wounds above the surface, and more
blood was drawn forth, flowing down his side. Huonke said,
You will stay with us, You will stay with us, and the child
said Yes, yes, yes, and did not speak again.
Siba came and stared at the little boy. He broke off the
stem of a taro leaf and with it probed the wound on the left
side. The belly leaf was floating, and the small horim: Siba
attempted to push back a trace of white intestine which protruded near the navel as if, by concealing the evidence of
hurt, he might somehow be of help. Weake was failing rapidly
and did not cry out; his mouth was open, and his lips had
puffed and dried. In the attack He had received a heavy blow,
for the side of his face had grown swollen and distorted,
Yonokma leaned forward and removed a bit of straw
from the dry lips.
Siba ran across the garden and sprang onto the roof
of the pig shed by the fence. There, with a great cracking
sound like anger, he broke off a banana frond and hurled
it down into the sili yard: this leaf would be the little boy's
last bed. Returning, he picked Weake up out of the water
and carried him homeward through the garden. Huonke and
the two elege trailed Siba through the dusk, shaking with
cold.
The small body was limp, with one foot lying on the
other, and arms hanging: the blood dripped very slowly on
the weeds. His breathing had silenced, and his eyes, half
closed, had glazed, like those of a fresh-killed animal. Nilik,
Wereklowe, and Polik had come to look at him in his pilai,
but it was evening now and he was dead.
The next morning, in the middle of the yard, Huonke
and Tamugi built the chair. Four women emerged from the
cooking shed and kneeled before it, and more women were
already climbing the stile which separated the small sili from
the main yard of Wereklowe. The wailing had commenced,
156 •

and the Alua clan was coming through the fields from all
across the southern Kurelu.
In the pilai crouched Asikanalek, twisted by grief.
Against the wall, where sunlight filtered through the chinks,
sat Weake's small silhouette, already arranged in the position
he would be given in the chair. Asikanalek went to him and
carried him outside into the day. Still holding the boy, he
kneeled in the bright sun before the pilai and, staring upward at the sky, lamented. The men about him looked disheveled and distraught, and Asikanalek's shoulders were
smeared with yellow clay. Weake's appearance in the yard
had caused a stir among the women; the long day of fierce
wailing had begun.
Weake was draped with two large shell bibs, which
covered not only his mutilated chest but his torn stomach;
the wife of Tamugi kneeled before him, binding up his legs.
A man adjusted a new funeral horim to replace the one which
had floated off in the brown ditch. Beside the chair Huonke
and Tamugi cried out and rubbed their legs. Now and then
Huonke would rub his hands together in a strange, stifffingered way, and glance about him, as if uneasy in the light
of day.
Weake was carried to his chair. His bound legs were
hung over the cross piece, and his head was held up by a
strip of leaf passed by Tamugi beneath his chin. At the foot
of the chair, wailing, Tamugi's wife crouched upon the
ground and mopped at it with torn-up grass; she made a
circular motion with her hand, scarring the earth. Other
women, with girls and small children, filed steadily into the
yard and arranged themselves upon the ground before lending their voices to the waves of sound.
A lizard darted from the fence to seize an insect. It
gulped busily, its small head switching back and forth, and
moved in quick fits and starts back to the shadows. Above,
• 157

a honey eater bounded to the limb of an albizzia. It too
cocked its head, unsettled by the wailing, but calmed before
it fled, and sat there preening. In the blue sky over the hill
the kites harassed one another, screeching.
The men draped shell belts on Weake, binding his brow
with the bright colors and building the belts into a kind of
crown. But his head was small, and most of the belts were
lain along his sides and down the chair arms. While his
attendants scratched and shuffled and thought thoughts, in
the warm doldrums of their existence, the child sat alone in
cold serenity. He seemed to grieve, nevertheless, as if oppressed by all his trappings; when the women came and
draped their nets, they almost hid him in the shadows.
Huonke came and smeared him with fresh pig grease, and
his shins, still in the sun, took on a gleam: Tukum, himself
gleaming from the pig grease of the day before, perched by
the fence on a small stone and watched Weake. Tukum was
one of the few children who seemed upset, though, like all
his companions, he had seen many funerals and would see
many more.
A group led by Polik sang wheezily and long the ancient
chants of mourning, working the ground with gnarled old
toes and rubbing spavined thighs. One of them, his wrinkled
skin reptilian, felt peevishly for the tobacco roll buried in
the pouch strung on his back. At the same time he contributed
his mourning, a frail woo, woo, woo, and his long nose ran
tumultuously with all the rest: the hole for boars' tusks in
his septum had stretched wide with old age, so that the
light shone through it.
Some of the men brought belts, and Huonke called out
to them in greeting, a loud wah-h, wah-h, somehow impertinent, and at the same time self-ingratiating. He and his
brother-in-law stood at the chair and haggled covertly about
158 •

the placement of the belts. While haggling, Tamugi contrived
to sob, rolling his eyes in the frank, open face of cant.
Four pigs came forth, and the pilai's owner destroyed
them with a kind of sad authority. All four died speedily,
snouting the ground, legs kicking, as if they were trying to
bore into the earth. They were dressed swiftly, and the
yegerek brought logs. Weake's friend Okal was among them:
he wore the yellow clay of mourning and a pad of leaves to
protect his shoulder from the wood. Like all the other boys,
he played a large part in the funeral of his friend.
Nilik, with his affinity for pig, had come in time to
finger the bloody pieces, which were hung on a rack behind
the chair. Before the chair an old woman beat her breast
with stumpy hands: Aulk, aulk, aulk, aulk, she cried—Loo,
loo, loo, loo. The yellow clay was crusted in the skin folds
of old breasts, of fallen hips. On the far side of the yard a
giant butterfly, dead white and black, danced out of the
shadows of the woods and, passing through the akuni, danced
back again.
Huonke and Tamugi cried loud and long, mouths trembling and eyes alert. They watched the entrance of Weaklekek, his people behind him carrying three large flat ye stones
decorated around the middle with fur and cowries. The ye
stones are valuable but not sacred, though they may later
become so; they are used, like cowrie belts, as a medium of
exchange. Wah! Wah! cried Huonke. Wah! Wah! cried Tamugi. The party stopped before the chair to grieve, and then
the men went onward toward the pilai, while the women and
small children remained in the upper yard.
Weaklekek sat down quietly and stared into the earth.
He was one of Weake's namis, and plainly he blamed himself for the boy's death, since it was his kaio that had been
abandoned. But the raid and death were part of akuni ex• 159

istence, and neither Weaklekek nor Woluklek were blamed
by any of the others. Even so, Woluklek, who had been unwise enough to lead the three boys to the river, did not come
to the funeral at all.
U-mue's wives had come, and with them the children
of his sili. Aku and Holake joined the little girls of the village,
who were going about on small self-conscious errands; the
girls smiled modestly at everyone, in the pretty illusion that
all eyes were upon them. Nylare, who is very young, had a
poor grasp of the situation, but she took up the wail of
mourning, humming it contentedly to her own rhythms. Natorek, escaping his mother repeatedly, played in the narrow
path through the massed women; like most akuni children,
he accepted his mother's cuffs and cries in great good spirits
and smiled expansively at all and everything even when latecomers stepped upon him. He was finally placed under the
care of his brother Uwar, who took him to a corner of the
yard and picked his lice.
While the food cooked, more men arrived; they overflowed into the woods behind the fencing. The mourning
faltered in the midday pall, and nothing stirred. Only the
stinging bees, black and yellow, toiled remorselessly on a
small open hive, hanging upside down from a pandanus leaf
beyond the fence; they hung in the air below the hive, their
hair legs dangling, or clasped one another in dry, delicate
embrace.
Near the main entrance of Abulopak the tips of the
long grasses had been tied together in three places in the
weeds: the tied grass forbids trespassing. The signs were a
warning to the women, who were nearly two hundred strong,
and whose use of the near weeds to urinate had become an
offense to Wereklowe.
The rock fire was dismantled, and pig distributed among
the men: a few bits were borne to certain women. Asikana160 •

lek's daughter Namilike walked around with her small net
stuffed with hiperi, passing it out; Weake's little sister Iki
Abusake was also there, as pretty in a baby way as Namilike
herself. Iki Abusake's curious name means "Hand That Could
Not Help Itself," the expression used by the akuni to account
for the phenomenon of pig-stealing.
During the eating, soft waves of mourning rose and fell.
The sun, sliding down into the west, burned hotly on Weake,
and women tried to shield him with their nets. But now the
men came forward and stripped him of his belts: the meal
was over, and the day's business must begin. The belts were
stretched on a frond before the pilai, with the kains seated
in a line along each side. When the belts had been admired
for a time, and their destiny decided, Wereklowe stood up
to dispense them.
Until this time Wereklowe had remained out of the way,
ceding the administration of the funeral to Asikanalek: Asikanalek was not only a sub-kain of the Alua but a fine warrior who had killed two, and a close relative of the dead boy.
But the exchange of goods was an end purpose of the funeral,
and the greatest leader of the clan usually directs it. With
a weighty pause between the names, Wereklowe gave out
the belts; he was attended by respectful silence. One belt
was awarded to Weaklekek, but Weaklekek was still morose
and waved it off; in his despair, and despite all his rich gifts,
he felt he did not deserve it. Lakaloklek, more practical, came
forth and took it in her husband's name.
Despite the great amount of grieving, there seemed
small hint of outrage. Huonke complained that the pavi
should not have done it, but then, Huonke has killed once
himself, a harmless woman found near the frontier who had
run away from the Siep-Elortak. Revenge there would be,
inevitably, but without moral judgments. Nevertheless, for
the funeral of a small boy, well over two hundred people
• 16 1

had pushed into the small sili: more presents were brought,
and more pigs killed, than for the funeral of Ekitamalek, a
kain's son and a warrior. Only a few could have come there
in real sorrow, and only a few for the exchange of goods.
The rest had come because the killing of a child, despite
its ancient sanctions, had made them unhappy and uneasy.
His back to Wereklowe, the child sat naked in the chair.
The women came to remove the nets, and Weake stirred;
his head dropped slowly to his breast, for his chin strap had
been loosened from behind. Then suddenly a man began to
shout, and a complete silence fell. The speaker was Polik,
and he was warning the people that they might be in danger.
In the fortnight previous Amoli, the violent kain of the
Haiman, had killed the young brother of a man with whom
he was having a dispute: taking the life of a relative of one's
antagonist, or even that of his small child, is not unusual,
being not only a more subtle punishment but a less dangerous
one. The man had fled to the Siep-Kosi but had sworn revenge, and Polik, on behalf of Amoli, warned any of the
latter's friends or kinsmen to be on guard. The fugitive's
wife was ordered to come to him the next morning in Abulopak, so that he and Wereklowe might have a full explanation
of the affair: it is one of the duties of the great kains to settle
feuds within the tribe, not infrequently at the expense of
their own pigs. When Polik had finished speaking, the guests
fidgeted uneasily, but after a while the voices mounted once
again, and the women returned to remove Weake's nets.
People were already departing from the sili. The thongs
were loosened, and Weake was carried back to the banana
leaves where the shell belts had lain. The yegerek, grim,
brought timber for the pyre: Tukum looked frightened
and was openly upset. The mourning quickened. Huonke
greased the body a last time and, when he was finished, took
up the bow and arrow. Another man held up the great thatch
162 •

bundle. The arrow was shot into it, releasing the spirit from
the body, and the man ran with the bundle up the yard; he
laid the bundle on the sili fence.
The fire had been assembled quickly, and a loud outcry
erupted with the flames: the body was hurried to its pyre.
Weake was laid upon his side, in the way that small boys
sleep, with a rough timber pillowing his head. The flames
came up beside him, and more wood was laid on top of him,
and he disappeared.
The mourning died after a time, and the sili emptied
quickly. Huonke brought out a red parrot feather and performed the purification ceremony on the men who had
handled the boy's body. The men, seated in a circle, held out
both their hands, and Huonke passed the parrot feather
through the air above the outstretched fingers. Afterward, as
much was done for him.
The last of Weake was a sweet choking smell, carried
upward by an acrid smoke from the crackling pyre, and
diffusing itself at last against the pine trees, the high crest
of the mountain wall, the sky.

• 163

The second part of the stone ceremony had been
postponed a day, out of respect for the funeral of Weake,
and meanwhile the hanging pig meat had acquired a sweet
stink which filled the Wilil pilai, overpowering the old resident smell of grease and sweat and strong tobacco. The
ears, tails, jaws, sow rump, and other pieces lay separately
on burned fern leaves before the pilai fire: the blood had
dried a purple brown, and the meat itself, its juices gone,
had shriveled into charred, amorphous lumps. Only the pig
mandibles, teeth gleaming in the lean smile of death, stood
out from the rest; these were arranged in a neat row beside
the fire.
Early in the morning, in the presence of Elomaholan
and other wisakun old men, as well as the warriors Aloro,
Tegearek, and Yeke Asuk, and a single non-Wilil, Wereklowe,
U-mue removed the holy stones from their crisp packets.
The stones are rarely exposed to view, and the ritual was
performed in awe and silence.
Each holy stone is far older than the reckoning of the
clan, and its particular powers are well known- The stones
are of the dark green color of the ye stones, a deep, opaque
jade, though a few are black; they are shaped beautifully
in the same spatulate flat way, narrowed sometimes in the
center, but they are smaller and they are undecorated. U-mue
took each one up—he was on his knees—and smeared it
gently and lovingly with grease of the warn wisa until, in
the firelight, the stone seemed to glow. The stones were then
put in their packets and replaced upon the mat.
Now U-mue returned to the front of the pilai, where,
taking up the pig tails, he sliced off the tufts with a bamboo
164

•

knife. Some of these tufts he threaded on a sliver; these
will be worn by important men as decoration. Another tuft
was hung up by Wereklowe among the fetish objects on the
frame above the fire, and a last one was inserted by Elomaholen into one of the stone packets to assure the ghosts
of dead Wilil that they had not been forgotten. The packets
were replaced in the high cupboard behind the hanging
bundles in the rear.
Elomaholan now went outside, followed by U-mue and
the warriors. Through the wide carpet of ferns and grasses
on which the pig had been devoured two days before, Elomaholan cleared a path to facilitate the departure of the
ghosts: these would now go forth in concert and set the
Wilil community to rights.
Since the eating of the wisa pig, the men had been
under a wisa ban and could not smoke or drink or touch
their wives. It was now time to remove the ban. A large
company of men went from the sili, taking sticks. In the
fields and undergrowth they beat the cane brakes and the
grass, searched coverts, and dug under stumps, in a search
for small wild creatures. All the men and boys took part in
this, even Elomaholan, as well as such guests as Wereklowe
and Polik—all, that is, except U-mue himself, who, supremely careful of his own dignity, stood to one side, arms
folded on his chest.
Wild creatures, when blown upon by the wisakun, then
eaten, have the power to remove the wisa ban. The people
do not know the basis of this power; they only say it has
always been this way. Although anyone can do the blowing,
only the true wisakuns are effective, and the power is passed
on from father to son. The blood line is not important: Asokmeke is a wisakun and can transfer his power to his stepson
Tukum. If Tukum should not wish it when the time comes,
Asok-meke's gift will be inherited by Siba.
• 165

In a half-morning of search and shouting, twenty-one
large mice and field rats were taken, and a beehive with
its edible larvae, and a large yellow-faced grasshopper. The
first animals, four mice, were given to Elomaholan, and he
cupped them in his hand; the tails hung neatly in a row out
to one side, and on the other a bouquet of mice heads, their
round black eyes beady with terror.
A little girl came running from Abulopak in hysterics;
she was one of those supposed to undergo the mourning
mutilation, She was caught and thrashed by an old woman,
and, as the thrashing of a child is a very rare event, it created
a pleasant diversion for the hunters.
Toward midday U-mue returned to the pilai, carrying
the creatures with him in a net bag: they were wrapped
with women's neatness in leaves and grass. A banana frond
was laid on top of the warn wisa, and the dead rats and mice,
the grasshopper and the small open hive, were laid in a row
along its spine. U-mue smoothed the rodent's fur with the
same delicacy and care that he had used to handle the green
stones; he then straightened the rat whiskers, a touch which
a less fastidious kain might not have thought of. When he
was finished he sat back, and the other men shouted violently at the ghosts, Go out, go out! The men rushed out of
the pilai, chasing the ghosts before them.
The animals were given to young boys, who opened
them with bone needles and removed the entrails. Stones
were being heated in a pyre, and the cleaned rats were placed
along the edges of the fire to be singed: their backs arched
as they shrank, and their teeth protruded. Okal toasted one
rat on the end of a pointed stick; like all children, he did
not tum his body from the flames but leaned backward from
his own hand, squinching his face to alleviate the heat. The
charred rats were wrapped up in leaf and returned into the
166 •

pilai, where the ritual blowing was performed on them, prior
to their baking in the fire.
Big Woknabin, the only Wilil warrior still living in the
pilai of the holy stones, sat by himself. Woknabin's blind
eye saddens his face, though true sadness may stem from the
knowledge that his wife is a known slut. The woman is condemned by the community as kepu, in the sense of "worthless," but this knowledge must be small consolation to her
husband.
Tukum, sucking his thumb, sat on a rock and watched
the older boys. In a little while he joined some smaller
children—Natorek and Oluma and U-mue's tiny daughter
Nylare, the only female in the company. Together they
gnawed on some old pig bones left over from two days before
and watched the construction of the cooking pit. Yeke Asuk,
who labors rarely, sat by the pit, chewing on a pig ear; he was
nearly burned by the boy Weneluke, who dropped a hot
stone from his tongs while trying to help the older boys construct the fire. Weneluke always tries very hard. He is highhipped and gangly and a sissy, with the sissy's unhappy recourse to sneaky giggling and dirty jokes; it is he who has
done the finest rock drawings at the fire sites across the
mountainside. Yeke Asuk sneered at him, though mildly: he
had recovered now from his bad arrow wound, and with his
full belly, new fiber string, and fresh coat of grease, was fat
with good spirits. He took up a piece of raw ginger and ate it
with a happy crunch. Ordinarily ginger is eaten wrapped
in its own leaves, which cool it, and Yeke Asuk, gasping for
breath, rolled his eyes and moaned and clapped his hands
over his ears as if otherwise his poor skull might explode.
A moment later he ate another piece, with the same ceremony.
Natorek, with his ferocious energy, toddled from group
to group, assaulting people. For his girth he is very quick
• 1 67

and strong, and he snapped a piece of savory fern right
out of Tukum's mouth. Tukum retrieved it, looking injured
and owlish, but a moment later he laughed huskily to himself with a kind of jolly fiendishness, the sort of laugh that
might issue from a stump.
Natorek had concealed himself behind the grass stack
of the fire and was throwing grass spears at his brother Uwar.
The stack was as tall as Natorek, so that only his rust curls
could be seen, agitating furiously as he plotted; every few
moments a pudgy hand would rise out of the smoke and
hurl a spear, then disappear again. His concealment was
superior to his accuracy, but nonetheless Uwar got up with
his lank grace and drove him disdainfully into the open. The
embattled boy leapt and cavorted to avoid Uwar's missiles,
but most of his energy was exerted before, between, and long
after the moments that the spears were thrown, for his timing
was primitive: Natorek is very much an earthbound creature,
and despite all his precautions the battle ended as it was
doomed to end, and an old man came to comfort him when
he cried.
The pit was opened, and the men gathered in the small
yard. Pig meat and rats were passed around, and though
everyone was supposed to receive at least a small scrap of
the latter, U-mue and other men passed it by: the bulk of
the rats was consumed by the yegerek and by Woluklek.
The boys gnawed fiercely at the rats, which, quite aside
from their curative powers, are a delicacy. Okal and his
twin—they are the sole identical twins in the southern Kurelu,
distinguishable only by the fact that Okal's right ear is
cropped in mourning—ate rats most avidly of all. Their sharp
ears and quick slanted eyes, their vulpine faces, gave them
a predatory air, like wolf-children.
The yard filled with the soft, slippery sound of pigeating and a faint scent of putrefaction. Everyone ate the
168 •

cooked ferns and hiperi, sitting cross-legged in the sun, and
at the end of the feast, before going home, they greased one
another once again, with jovial rubs and slappings. The
yegerek did the same, and Natorek stood up for his anointing,
which was administered by Uwar. He stretched his arms high
above his head, as if on the point of clapping for the world's
attention.

• When the feast was over, Tukum ran straight
around to Weake's sili in Abulopak. There, early that morning, a very different ceremony, iki palin, had taken place.
Out of respect for the dead boy, the two outer joints had
been removed from two fingers of Weake's sister, Iki Abusake, and three other little girls. In addition, the upper third
of a young boy's left ear had been sliced off with a bamboo
knife.
A half-hour before the ceremony the fingers of the little
girls had been bound tight, to cut off circulation; just prior
to the operation the children were struck forcibly on the
upper arm, to render the hand numb. The fingers were placed
on a piece of wood and severed with a blow of a stone adze.
This latter task had been performed by Tamugi, who is
considered skillful in such matters. The fingers are hung in
the cooking shed to dry, and the next day burned, then buried
in a special place behind the pilai.
The boy is a member of Wereklowe's sili, and his ear
served as a token of that sili's grief. One little girl is Wereklowe's niece, another the daughter of a warrior who, having
neither pig nor stone to bring to the funeral, offered the
fingers of his child. A third is the daughter of Tamugi, and
• 169

Iki Abusake is an orphan. One of these girls had taken the
place of a fifth child, the one who had gotten hysterical and
run off. Though this little girl had been beaten, she had not
been forced back to the ceremony; as in the case of kepu
men in time of war, her shame is thought to be sufficient
punishment.
At three, Iki Abusake is the smallest of the girls, though
the other children cannot be more than four. The children
sat together in the cooking shed. Their hands had been
bandaged heavily in leaves, bound round with grass, and to
slow the bleeding each held the green mass upright, beside
her face, like a toy or present to be shown to friends. The
hands bled badly all that morning, and each little girl held
a clump of grass under her elbow to absorb the blood. None
of them gave evidence of more than slight discomfort, but
all were silent in a way that children rarely are, and the eyes
of Iki Abusake, whom the children call Kibusake, were round
with shock.
Their relatives talked quietly to the little girls, and after
a while the children were taken out into the yard. Many
women had come, for this was their occasion, and they sat
talking cheerfully by the funeral ashes. The women made
a kind, mild fuss over the little girls, but otherwise no notice
was taken of them. They were fed hiperi and ate it. Later
the little boy with the sliced ear went to the men's feast
of the Wilil and gnawed his rat meat with the rest; the side
of his head had been smeared carelessly with clay.
Tamugi's wife sat by herself, picking the bones of Weake
out of the ashes. She used small wooden tongs, and she
laid the white scraps in a little pile on a banana leaf. The
motion of her arm, though sure and graceful, was infinitely
slow, as if she were entranced. Her eyes were wide and sad,
and she looked peacefully at the others without really seeing
170 •

them. When her task was finished, she folded the leaf over
the bones and took it away into the cooking shed.
The few men in the sili kept out of the women's way,
Weaklekek was silent still and spent most of the day weaving
fiber, hunched in upon himself. But late in the afternoon
the men asserted themselves once more. They raised a shout,
and the yegerek came flying up the yard through the packed
women, hurling stones at the fences and gateway of the sili
and crying out: this was the banishment of Weake's ghost,
reminding it of its journey to the Wittaia. The yegerek came
back laughing, and all the women laughed as well, for the
ghost-stoning is a constructive ceremony from which nothing
but good can come. More hiperi were taken from the fires,
and Tukum, still greasy with his pig, secured two round ones
for himself and made off with them to the terrains of the men.
On the third day of the funeral another hiperi feast
was given, this time in the sili of Wereklowe. Among matters
discussed were steps to be taken in the future to safeguard
the Aike frontier, as well as the details of the retaliatory raid
which was to come: the death of Weake, who had claimed
Weaklekek as his nami and who had not only been a member
of Wereklowe's village but related closely to Asikanalek and
other important Alua, was not going to pass unavenged.
Huwai had died for the death of Ekitamalek, and another
enemy, and preferably more than one, would pay for the
death of Weake: that Weake had died as a result of the
death of Huwai, or of Torobia, or of Owak, Tegaolok, Wie,
Haknisek, or Mali, all five of whom had died of wounds received in recent moons on the Tokolik and Waraba, was not
the point: revenge was an ancient rhythm of akuni life, a
cycle without end.
The feast was scarcely started when an alarm cry came,
and this time the sili emptied of its warriors. The Wittaia
• 171

were said to have struck again, on the mountain path to
Lokoparek, killing both women and children.
The warriors ran through the araucarias in a swift, loping
stride, past Wuperainma and up across the fields above
Homaklep, into the trees. But the alarm was born of the high
tensions of days past; if there had been Wittaia on the mountain, no trace of them was found. The men came down the
hill, and most returned to Abulopak, where the feasting was
resumed. Once again, to shouts and laughter, Weake's ghost
was sent upon its way in a hail of stones. The ceremony was
enacted a final time on the following afternoon, and on all
these days the grass near the place of ambush was burned
and burned again. Weake's ghost would linger near even a
faint trace of his blood and would not, until all blood was
gone, be free to cross into the country of the enemy.
The bones of Weake had already been placed in a fenced
shelter behind the pilai. Until his death has been avenged,
a kind of altar will be maintained in the cooking shed of his
sili, where two of the funeral nets still hang upon the wall.
The tails of the slaughtered pigs are fastened to the nets,
and with them a stalk of toa, the heavy-bodied cultivated
grass which tastes like a fine mixture of artichoke and celery;
Weake had been very fond of toa, and its place on the nets
is designed to please his ghost. In the rafters above hangs
the grass bundle used as a sign to ghosts that all has been
taken care of in the sili and that therefore they need not loiter
but should get on about their business. When a Wittaia has
been killed by Weake's people, the grass will be burned and
the altar taken down.
The death of Weake was not called out to the Wittaia,
for this was scarcely necessary; nonetheless, the enemy celebrated an etai. The boy's mother, who lives with the Wittaia,
was certainly aware of Weake's identity, but what part she
played in the celebration the akuni did not know.
172 •

When the sun had risen from behind the wall,
Yeke Asuk and Tekman Bio came up through the fields,
bound for the mountains to cut weapons. Yeke Asuk wore a
new head net and carried a stone adze slung upon his shoulder; his mouth harp was stuck jauntily through a hole in
his earlobe, a hard red berry dangling on the end of its string.
Tekman Bio wore a fine hawk-feather pouch slung on his
back, and carried a pale laurel spear. The boy Supuk went
with them. They traveled slowly up the hillside, observing
the mountain morning.
Above their heads loomed the limestone walls, and the
men called out, Yeke Asuk-a-o, Tekman Bio-e, and the spirits
answered them—asuk-a-o,—bio-e, Mokat, mokat, they said,
and laughed: these were their own spirits and did not
frighten them. Farther on, the path was intersected by a
small stream where it flowed over a large pale boulder buried
in the ground. Here the people sharpen their stone tools, and
the boulder's surface is scraped and scarred with ancient
labors. Yeke Asuk put down his adze, removed the stone
from its fiber binding, and scraped it back and forth under the
water: white powder issued from the limestone and flowed
away in the clear rivulet, toward the valley.
The men went upward. In a beech tree, in a bower of
graybeard lichen, a bird of paradise flapped and spun, cawing more loudly and more harshly than any of its drab crow
kin across the world; the sound is a strange grating squeal,
the dominant noise of the mountain forests. Protruding sideways from its breast like a brilliant double-pointed shield
was its bib of iridescent blue. The bib flashed against the
mist which felt its way along the wall above,
• 173

They had entered the cloud forest: here the clouds convene in all but a few hours of the day. The mosses flourish,
climbing from a dense carpet on the ground to thicken the
twigs and tree trunks; in the constant damp, the mosses have
made their kingdom. The mossy forest drips with moisture;
the naked men moved carefully, avoiding the cold branches.
They went on higher, to one of the numerous congregations of squared boulders on the hillside; the boulders form
natural amphitheaters of great majesty, and the people
choose these places for their fires. The men had now climbed
very high, and the whole course of the Aike, which descends
from the mountains through a narrow gorge, twisted out
onto the plain before them.
Supuk built a fire, using dead pandanus leaf and graybeard lichen for his tinder. A stick split at the end—a stone
holds the split open—is placed on the ground, the tinder
within the split, and a strip of rattan is run around beneath:
the rattan, one end taken in each hand, is pulled up and
down until a spark ignites the tinder, which is protected
from the wind by the split wood. On the fire Supuk laid the
sapling, to dry it and sear its bark.
Tekman Bio, meanwhile, had found a fine straight laurel
pole, fourteen feet long when dressed; with Yeke Asuk, he
split it down its length, using log wedges. One piece was
split again in two, and the best of the three lengths was stood
against a boulder and its bark chipped away.
Yeke Asuk, perched on a rock, carved some new arrow
points from a split piece of myrtle, using a boar's-tusk
scraper which he carries hooked in his fur armlet. Yeke Asuk
avoided the heavy work, attributing his reticence to his recent wounds. Now and again he described excitedly to Tekman Bio the activities of the enemy, which he imagined he
could see; the distance was great, but the men have kept
their hunters' eyes, and Yeke Asuk is an imaginative man.
174 •

When the bulk of the spear pole had been chipped
away, with only the finer work remaining, Tekman Bio laid
it on his shoulder; Yeke Asuk took up the adze and Tekman
Bio's spear, and the boy followed them down the mountain.
The rains of afternoon were gathering on the rim, and they
moved swiftly. On the way Tekman Bio gathered a bundle
of coarse grass, which will be used in the last stages as a kind
of sandpaper.
Early in the morning Tekman Bio brought his new
spear to Homuak, where he laid it in the waters of the
spring. He broke rocks to make new edges and, after removing the spear from the spring, took it up to the council ledge
above, where he built a fire. He scraped the long pole with
the stones, and finally he rubbed it with the gritty grass to
make it smooth.
The spear-rubbing with leno or hugi grass is a suggestive motion to the akuni, and the words appear in a kind of
chorus to a sportive song which Tekman Bio sang softly as
he worked. The song concerns two promiscuous women
named Kiluge and Yai-ige who give themselves—lelokano
—to the young men along the paths "all the way from Homuak to Abulopak":
Kiluge Yai-ige
Homuak lelokano
Araken arahalok
Abulopak lelokano
(Vigorously): Hugi are ara
Leno are ara.

The shape of the spear was still unsatisfactory, and
with the stone adze Tekman Bio did some more light chipping. Again he scraped the whole spear with a boar's tusk,
and especially the long white blade, on each face of which
• 175

he carved two facets, so that the cross section of the blade
was like a flattened diamond. All this work, performed steadily but without haste, took a long time, and it was not until
afternoon that he took a substance from a leaf and rubbed
it on the spear: this is a kind of wax made from the cocoon
of the black and yellow caterpillar, a creature esteemed
highly as a food. The wax is thought to cure the wood, and
he rubbed it painstakingly all over. Warm pig fat was then
applied, for the grease is said to give the spear resilience and
to facilitate its final straightening. Finally he rubbed on another coat of wax, turning the spear carefully against the
flames.
On the day following, Tekman Bio helped Werene and
Tegearek with the heavy work in their new gardens, but the
day after, he completed his new spear. He pared it finer
with the boar's tusk, bent it continually at the fire, and
rubbed it all over again with the magic grease of pig. At
last it was ready for its simple decoration. Just at the base
of the long blade he wound a sleeve of fern pith, coppercolored. He held its point up to the sky, pleased with the
feel of it, with the knowledge in his own hands.

176 •

Tekman Bio had left his new spear for a day to
help Werene and Tegearek in their new gardens. He did this
out of friendly obligation, as they must do another day for
him. The men had worked in these gardens for a month or
more, between wars and feasts, etais and funerals, and only
now were they beginning to emerge out of the broken litter
of dead bushes. The roots and trash had been removed, and
the hiperi beds, laid out, were climbing slowly with the excavation of the ditches.
Aloro was there, with Woluklek and Siloba, toiling and
grunting. Aloro worked savagely, driving his hiperi stick like
a plunged spear. In the heavy postures of field labor his
shriveled leg swung clumsily, recalcitrant. He seemed to
sense this and stumped angrily about his work. Unlike Aloro,
Woluklek worked slothfully, picking and poking and gazing
philosophically across the land, while Siloba, laughing,
worked in furious fits and starts.
The men dug and levered, scraped and pried, and the
sticks thunked stupidly into the ground. Tegearek worked
hard, but often he straightened to offer an opinion he had
come to, usually on the subject of war; unlike the rest, he
found it hard to think and work at the same time.
The rain came swiftly through the sun, but it was
transient and the men worked on—not against time, for time
is not of meaning in the valley, or against seasons, for seasons
are weak and fitful, untouched by laws of distant springs,
temperate autumns. The men worked against the field itself,
the weak soil of it and the wild growth which would not relinquish it without a struggle, nor for very long.
The rain passed. The sun reflected from the copper
• 177

wings of a black hornet, from the thatch of a small shelter
which, in this light, was gold, from the white fiber sleeves at
the bases of the long spear blades. The spears were planted
at the corners of the fields, the only sharpness in the swollen
landscapes of hot middle day.

Like most of the young unmarried men, Walimo
visits a good deal among the other villages and sleeps casually in the pilai where night finds him. Last night he slept
in a sili of the Haiman, beyond the Elokera, but this time
his visit was not casual. The village belongs to Maitmo, who
fiercely believes that Walimo should be killed for having
crossed enemy lands to visit clansmen on the far side of the
Baliem. It was Walimo's idea to sound out the people there
in order to keep closely in touch with Maitmo's state of
mind.
It appeared that Maitmo still held the same opinion,
and Walimo returned to the southern Kurelu as downcast
as before. He wandered about in his airy way, playful and
equable as ever: Walimo is liked by everybody, perhaps
even Maitmo and Wereklowe, who are anxious that he die.
On the savanna he took up some strands of sedge and wove
grass toys; he fashioned a tiny decorative basket, a replica
of the men's back pouch, some miniature coil skirts, and a
cat's-cradle.
When his toys were completed, he abandoned them to
the mice and insects, trailing homeward toward Hulibara.
178 •

In eight months or ten, or in a year, a mauwe
feast will be called by Kurelu. The most elaborate festival
of the akuni, the mauwe is held once every few years,
its timing determined by the tribe's need of the ceremonies which comprise it as well as by the supply of pigs.
Though the mauwe is called formally by Kurelu, it is celebrated in all the villages, under the direction of the local
kains; the ceremonies require more than a week, and the
period surrounding the mauwe is a time of peace, of restoration and renewal—from the sili fence and buildings and
whatever else may need repair, to friendships and clan relationships—and a cleaning of the holy stones.
The ceremonies of the mauwe surround the initiation
of young boys and girls into the tribe, followed by marriage
of the eligible girls; there are no spinsters, for no girl is so
poor or ugly that she will not be taken, if only as an extra
wife, by some old or poor or ugly man. There is a song that
the young men sing:
Where are all the young girls gone?
We danced with them at the Liberek
And now they are all married.
Well, what can be done,
When the kains take all the women?
The initiation of the girls is little more than a first step
in their marriage: the rush skirt is removed and thrown
away, and a woman's coil skirt given in replacement. At the
next mauwe Loliluk's Werekma may reach womanhood in
this way, and, if she wishes it, and is wished in turn, she
may be married. The marriage is arranged between the fami• 179

lies, since it involves a complex set of obligations and exchange. The arrangements concluded, Loliluk will cry ceremonially at his loss, and matters will proceed.
On the day before the marriage Werekma, with her
mother and other women of her family, will be presented by
her male relatives with a large amount of pig meat; this is
perhaps the one time in her life when Werekma will eat
more than a few scraps of meat. The pigs are given ordinarily
by the girl's brothers, but since Natorek and Uwar are not
yet pig-owners, the animals must be supplied by Loliluk
himself. Should Loliluk be poor at the time of mauwe, the
pigs would probably be given by U-mue, as the kain closest
to the household, though U-mue will expect to be repaid.
The following day Werekma will remain at home in
Wuperainma. The man—it may be Walimo, who is thinking
these days of marriage and who, as an Alua and therefore
waia, is eligible to marry a Wilil girl—comes to Wuperainma,
where he is feted with fine pig meat; he is accompanied by
sisters or other female members of his family. Werekma remains inside the cooking shed, protesting modesty and indifference, but after a while she wanders out. The sisters
then ask if they may take her back with them to their village, and, when permission is granted, a request is made for
all her property—not only the nets, ye stones, shell goods
that she may have been given by her family, but the leftover pig meat of the late feast. Werekma then goes off with
the women, while the man remains behind; he is now forbidden his own village and must skulk about in other pilais.
His family, meanwhile, holds a feast—part of the mauwe—
in honor of Werekma. In two or three days the husband is
sent for and returns.
With Werekma and a small number of his people, he
enters a new ebeai built for the marriage. The couple sit to180 •

gether on her net, where they receive marriage instruction,
including the advice not to be shy with each other. Pig and
hiperi are eaten in a kind of marriage supper, and, after a
few hours of pleasant conversation, Werekma will be left
alone with her new husband. At this time Werekma may or
may not be a virgin, but, as she is a self-righteous child of
prudent character, she probably will be, and the first night
of her marriage gives every promise of being a forlorn one.
Should Werekma's brother Uwar be among those boys
initiated at the mauwe, his ordeal, a gentle one, will be approximately as follows.
For a period of four days or so he will be largely confined to the lower floor of U-mue's pilai; he is not allowed to
go up into the loft, for he is meant to abstain from sleep as
best he can. This is a test of his ability to undergo privation.
To sustain himself, he is given a piglet and four sweet potatoes. He may go out to relieve himself, and for a period
each day he is taken to a field with other boys, where they
are taught the niceties of war and ambush, and where they
join for the first time in a kind of etai and fierce dancing.
At the end of this period he will be required to shoot
arrows through a circlet of grass, to establish his skill in this
most important regard: from now on he may go to war if he
likes, though he is not forced to do so. His nami, a Siep-Kosi,
will be present and will present him with his own bow and
arrows and a ye stone. For perhaps half an hour he must
stand still, with the bow and arrows in his left hand and the
ye stone in his right. The nami also gives him a small net bag
for his belongings, and a cowrie belt, which is wrapped
around his head; this is the second of three occasions in his
life on which he wears the shell belt, the others being birth
and death. At this point the initiation is concluded, and pigs
are killed and eaten in celebration.
• 181

Throughout this period of initiations and marriage,
purification rituals are held in all villages holding sacred
stones, with a continual round of feasting and exchange of
goods in the guise of gifts: the presentations and rewards,
the settlement and creation of obligations, are one of the
main reasons for the mauwe. Guests and relatives are entertained, for visitors come to mauwes from as far off as the
Yalimo: except in time of mauwe, the Yali men, in their
extraordinary corsets of hard hoops, appear very infrequently, on trading missions. Every effort is made by the
great kains to strengthen ties and promote good feeling and
to bury the more dangerous feuds, which weaken the whole
tribe. Pigs are awarded by the kains to the slayer of each
enemy, as well as to children who had ears or fingers cut
in sign of mourning. Hundreds of pigs are slaughtered during mauwe, and it will be another year or two or three before the tribe can afford another.

182 •

A woman in Hulibara, village of Walimo's father,
Yoli, was visited last night by a man. She was half asleep
when he crawled up into her sleeping-loft, and in her drowsiness she did not pay full attention to him; he was in haste
and was already inside her when it came to her that he was
not her husband. She shouted for help, and another woman
in the ebeai came flying to her assistance. Between them
they grasped the man, but with their cropped fingers they
were not able to hold him. The husbands came finally from
the pilai, but by this time the intruder had departed, leaving his horim behind.
Though there is really not much hope, horims being
difficult to trace, the villagers are most anxious that the man
be identified, for they are short of grease and in dire need
of the pig that he must forfeit.

Not far from Lokoparek, just to the north, the
upper Tabara flows through the forest, under the mountain
wall. Here a man named Pumeka came to cut wood. He had
been working for some days, and rough laths roughly
pointed at both ends were stacked beneath an overhanging
rock. The woodcutters knew of the techniques of ringing
trees or building fire at their bases, and the latter method
was employed infrequently on the old dead giants among
the beech and oak. But for the most part they confined them• 183

selves to smaller laths, to which their building had long
since been adapted.
On the face of the rock where Pumeka stacked his
wood, above a shallow fire site protected from the rain, was
a rich pattern of charcoal drawings. Most of the drawings
on this rock had been done in the past year by the boy
Weneluke. Of all the rock drawings in the region, these
were the most complex and original, though so many had
been made, overlapping one another, that some were difficult to pick out from the rest. Nevertheless, rude human figures were discernible, and several big puna lizards,
and some pigs, including a pig splayed open with its ribs
showing, in a strong pattern quite unlike any otlier drawing
on the fire rocks, There was a sad-faced woman in a few
simple lines—head, eyes, nose, and genitalia—and a remarkable man, nearly four feet tall, whose head and arms
had been blacked in—this technique, too, was unusual—
over a blank ovoid body, like a great spider perched atop an
egg. This drawing was so unlike anything else on all the
rock faces that Pumeka at first imagined the black thing to
be not a human head but an awesome sort of insect. His son
then pointed out the inevitable penis, situated in this case
just beneath the chin; the lower body appeared to have been
an afterthought, contributed perhaps by another artist.
Pumeka, whose name means "Water Snake," is a toothless, kindly man with foolish wrinkles on his face and a high,
delighted laugh. He is a village kain of Sinisiek, in the KosiAlua. Though he has a withered arm and cannot fight, he
has become an expert woodcutter, using his strong left side.
The Kosi-Alua, living far out on the valley floor where the
forest has disappeared, are in constant need of wood, and
Pumeka spends much of his time in the cloud forest near the
Tabara. Sometimes he is assisted in his work by his son and
by one or more old men. They lop the branches where the
184 •

tree falls in the forest, then haul the poles to the clearing
where Weneluke's rock drawings are located. Here the bark
is beaten with a heavy chunk of wood, to soften it, after
which it is stripped and the pole leaned against one of the
open rocks, out in the sun, to cure.
Pumeka started off down the mountain, bearing on one
shoulder a long tapered pole of kai and on the other his
stone adze; he moved in the long, swift stride of the akuni
and within a short time was below the cloud forest, on the
hillside tundra. The trail followed a small stream bed, and
the wet white sand between the rocks was cool beneath his
feet. Down he went, skirting the giant boulders, some of
them fifty feet in height, and on through the cool myrtle
woods of the lower hill, emerging at last in the old fields
above Homaklep. Women came up through the fields, bound
homeward to the mountain villages with their vegetables,
and he greeted all of them in his cheerful toothless way.
Pumeka is dismissed by other men, as all cripples but
Aloro are dismissed, with a wrinkling of the nose in a face
jerked sideways, the shrug and simultaneous motion of the
hand back past the face—Why talk about him? the gesture
seems to say. But he is liked and, in his way, respected.
He strode along the path below Wuperainma. He had
not eaten since early morning, and, as it was now midafternoon, he was quite hungry. In the grove grew wild raspberries and the small puffball mushrooms, but he did not
stop to eat them, nor did it occur to him to visit in Wuperainma. The Wilil and the Kosi-Alua were in a state of tension, as they often were, due most recently to the abduction
by Kosi-Alua of U-mue's wife Yuli and to the spearing of a
Kosi by Tegearek and Yeke Asuk: the Kosi had recovered,
but the grudge had not been settled. Furthermore, now that
U-mue had established his new pig village at Lokoparek,
he was trying to claim that the forest near there was his do• 185

main; he had expressed great anger that the Kosi-Alua
should use it without asking his permission. Husuk, for one,
was open in the opinion that U-mue was kepu; at the very
mention of U-mue, Husuk's nose wrinkled, and his hand rose
past his face as if waving off a fly, but Husuk, like U-mue,
was an intriguer, maneuvering for future power, and he suppressed his sardonic smile in U-mue's presence. Nevertheless, the Kosi-Alua went right on cutting wood. For all these
reasons, Pumeka would not have felt welcome in U-mue's
village.
Tukum and Supuk were coming through the wood. At
the edge of the grove they stopped and shook the small
willowy trunks, then picked up the large stinkbugs of brilliant green which rained in the grass. Passing Pumeka, the
boys offered him a bug, and he accepted it. Kain-a-laok,
Pumeka said, sucking in his breath: the phrase, with the
sucking-in of breath denoting awe, is used customarily in
accepting a gift, whether or not the giver is a kain, for
generosity is the ultimate sign of kainship. The stinkbug had
a violent smell and taste, from musk secreted from its glands,
and while this musk had evolved across millenniums to repel
the lean stomachs of birds, Pumeka bit into the bright bug
with his rear teeth, screwing up his face with pleasure. Kainmotok. Pumeka grinned. Great kain—the exaggerated phrase
was used affectionately, half joking.

The knoll of Anelarok lies at a crossing of the
paths, a way station where the warriors pause to search the
186 •

landscape, to build a fire, to smoke at midday in the shade
of the small trees. Here women dance on days of etai, and
the yegerek come to play a game of war.
The symplocos tree bears quantities of seeds like small
hard olives. Each seed represents a warrior, and the yegerek,
beneath the trees where the grass of decades has been
rubbed away, move companies of warriors about in sudden
charges, much as the companies move up and down the
Waraba or Tokolik. Sometimes small kaios are erected and
seeds are posted on the high straw platforms.
One sunny morning Uwar played war with Weneluke,
and Kabilek with Supuk; Natorek, Uwar's round brother,
large-eyed as a cuscus, sat in a small hole between the war
grounds. Uwar had a sharpened stick, a dart, and this he
threw into the ranks of Weneluke's warriors; Weneluke
picked it up and drove it into the army led by Uwar. Now
and then a seed would be run through and was carried to
the side; the army claiming the most punctured seeds would
win the game.
During the battle the boys kept up a ceaseless whistling
and sighing, to simulate the howls and chanting of real war.
Natorek sighed and whistled too, and now and then reared
up to hurl an impartial pudgy spear into one side or the
other, only to be banished back into his hole.
Off to one side thin Aloka, blind in one eye, played by
himself. A root emerged from the bare soil between his
armies, and this he called the Waraba. Aloka is jeered at for
his deformity, as Aloro must have been, but, unlike Aloro,
he is timid and will not escape from his condition.
Perched on a rock beneath the tree, in black, enigmatic
silence, the war kain Husuk watched the yegerek. He wore
a pair of long sedge tassels in his hair, like horns. Natorek,
hissing furiously, rose suddenly from his hole, his spear of
• 187

bent grass cocked back to throw; he jockeyed and feinted
on his tuberous legs, then threw himself flat to escape the
arrow that his recklessness might invite. Husuk's face
twitched briefly in a smile; he turned his head, as he had
done each little while, and gazed across the fields toward
the frontier.
Weneluke is the sensitive boy who did the fine rock
drawings near Lokoparek; he stays at times in the third sili
of Wuperainma, which belongs to the Wilil wisakun, old
Elomaholan.
Supuk, son of Palek of Homaklep, is one of the leaders
of the yegerek, a boy of great spirit and humor whose merry
face is the very face of childhood. Like many of the akuni,
he was given his name in remembrance of an event in the
thelifeof a parent or nami—in Supuk's case, his mother.
Supuk's mother was originally a Wittaia woman who,
unlike U-mue's wife Ekapuwe, came to the Kurelu of her
own will. A woman who crosses an enemy frontier usually
does so with an eye to suicide, but if she cries out that she
wishes to live, and takes the fancy of the warriors, she may
be accepted into the tribe. Supuk's mother was escorted as
far as a village, where, her charms proving inadequate, it
was agreed by the inhabitants that she should be executed
after all.
The unlucky woman fled into an ebeai and barred the
door. The villagers besieged the door and, getting nowhere,
decided at last to get at her from above. Without further
ado, they fell upon the thatching and proceeded to dismantle that part of the roof known as the supuk. At this
point Wereklowe happened along and decried what they
were doing: the destruction of the woman, however laudable, did not justify the destruction of a fine ebeai. The people deferred to Wereklowe, and, cooler heads having prevailed, the poor woman was given a pardon. Later she mar188 •

ried Palek, a hapless man without a wife, and their first child
was named for the supuk of the ebeai which had saved her
life.

• Heavy rains of the dark of the moon had delayed
the raid which was to avenge Weake. But one morning the
sun glinted in an iron sky, and warriors came to the southern
Kurelu from as far away as the Loro-Mabell. The raid was
planned for Wittaia fields near the Aike, and parties of warriors which would support the war to follow assembled inobtrusively at Anelarok, at Puakaloba, and at other vantage
points; at some places there were thirty or forty warriors.
The men moved covertly, in small bands, so as not to alert
the Wittaia sentries on the hills across the swamps. One
group concealed itself in the stand of wild sugar cane, close
to the Aike, where the Wittaia had lain who killed Weake.
This is a pretty place just above the winding river, but today it had a blasted look from the grass fires which had
burned away all trace of Weake's blood.
The raid was a failure, and withdrew almost before it
started. Asikanalek had led a band to the top of the Turaba,
where they lay in ambush for any passing enemy, but the
ambush too was frustrated, and in the late afternoon they
returned, picking their way nimbly and swiftly down among
the tumbled badlands. From Puakaloba the men watched
them, and in a little while they took up their own spears and
started home.
The next day, despite the rain, a war was called. Tekman Bio was delighted, as the war would give him his first
chance to carry his new spear.
• 189

Because of Weake, the Kurelu had its heart set on a
kill, and though the war was a formal one, to be fought according to the ancient pattern, a preliminary ambush had
been prepared. Led by Weaklekek, a party crept up the east
flank of the Waraba, under cover of an advance goup which,
in plain view, had taken possession of the north end in the
usual manner: the men went up the grass slope on their bellies. Weaklekek wore his shell bib on his back, and Asukwan,
finding himself encumbered, took off his horim and carried
it in his spear hand. The plan was to assault in sudden numbers the few Wittaia who would dance out in the first forays.
Meanwhile a second ambush party was stalking the
Waraba from the north. An hour earlier Nilik had come to
the Kosi-Alua kaio nearest the Waraba, where he was met
by Maitmo and Wereklowe with nearly a hundred men.
Wereklowe was very excited and talked ceaselessly, walking
in and out among the warriors; at one point he scrambled up
the kaio like a boy, to look over the situation for himself. The
Wittaia warriors were visible from the kaio, a dark crest of
black bodies and long spears on the far southern knoll of the
Waraba. Wereklowe jumped down again, and, after a brief
discussion with the other kains, he told the ambush party to
move forward. They crept out in small bands, keeping low,
dragging their spears behind them by the tips. Farther on
these warriors were joined by Husuk and his men, and the
entire party slid silently into the low wood which adjoins the
flats on the inside corner of the Waraba. In theory, Wittaia
warriors advancing toward the crest above would be cut
off in pincers.
But the first party had been discovered by the Wittaia,
who were now on the alert; when the skirmishing started,
they avoided the lower woods. Wereklowe went forward
from the northern knoll, speaking under his breath with a
soft fierce intensity. Erne, he said, erne. Come. Nilik fol190 •

lowed, spectral and bony against a hellish rain smoke on the
northern rim; the rain came and went all afternoon, but
neither side withdrew. In the downpours the men retired,
but they did not retire very far; they wrenched tall grasses
from the ground and held these on their heads to guard
their feathers.
Asikanalek and Huonke led the fighting on the heights.
This is not a usual position for Huonke, but today, as the
uncle of Weake, he was obliged to choose the forefront.
Aloro, as usual, was down on the lower flats, where the fighting is closer and where the terrain is better suited to his bad
leg. He had brought a spear, but on the battle line itself
another warrior lent to him a bow and arrows. Aloro moved
forward with his curious oblique gait, the bow, with its arrow poised and set, held in one strong hand where bow and
arrow met; with the other hand, which held spare arrows,
he could snap the bowstring in a second.
A few yards to his right the ambush party hid; a suspense hung upon the ridge, in the gray pall. Aloro tried to
lure the Wittaia men who faced him to a point at which they
might successfully be cut off and overwhelmed, but the
Wittaia remained wary and skirted wide. What they did not
imagine was the large numbers of the ambush party, and
when suddenly the bushes burst and fifty or sixty men
charged at their flank, they howled in alarm and bolted. The
main body of the Kurelu howled also, rushing forward in
support; they streamed in waves along the hillsides and
across the rocks, pouring down the rain horizon. Polik ran
after them, bawling orders like a man possessed.
The Wittaia, outnumbered, fled in panic, and the Kurelu swept them back almost a mile; though the enemy tried
briefly to hold the final knoll, they were soon driven off,
pursued by the screeching Kurelu onto the flats. They made
sporadic efforts to recoup and return, but they were badly
• 191

demoralized. The Kurelu, far stronger, held the heights, and
the day was won.
Despite the victory, no warrior of the enemy had been
run down and killed, and the returning warriors were disgruntled. A number of the enemy had been wounded, however, and on the Kurelu side several men had been hurt.
Feckless Siloba had an arrow in his shin, and Werene, carried away to an unusual degree by the exhilaration of the
rout, returned with a wound in his shoulder. The stunned
man, in the thick of things for the first time that the akuni
could remember, drew as much attention to the wound as
possible, under cover of outrage and anger; he was plainly
delighted by the prestige that had come his way through his
own miscalculation, and was determined to make the most
of it.
One warrior was all but pierced through by an arrow
entering below the collarbone; he was carried back on another's shoulders, supported on both sides. Aloro tried to remove the arrow, using sharp bamboo splinters. He picked
and pried, and the blood came, but, though he probed
deeply, the shaft remained. Another man, feeling in the
back, located the arrow point beside the shoulder blade, and
the onlookers remarked on this excitedly. Bending forward,
Aloro tried to grasp the broken splinter with his teeth; he
came away with bloody lips. Yeke Asuk squatted nearby,
giving advice, while Tuesike, who in the previous moon had
sat with an arrow in his stomach only a few feet from this
spot, looked on in silence. Tekman Bio came, and Aloro
ceded his place: Tekman Bio picked and worried at the
arrow and was able, after a quarter of an hour, to grasp and
withdraw it with his teeth. The blood started, and leaves
were brought to stanch the wound.
Uwar stood watching on the slope above, arms wrapped
around his neck, hands clasped on his nape; his elbows were
192 •

pressed together before his chin. All akuni assume this posture when they are cold, in evening and early morning and
in rain, but the children adopt it also when they are thoughtful.
A man brought sphagnum from the swamp, and the
wounded man was sponged with its cold water. He was then
stood upon his feet. Two men grasped folds of his stomach
skin and pinched them hard, and these Tekman Bio sawed
through with a bamboo sliver, in three places, to bleed out
the black blood. The splinter was then inserted into one
wound and jabbed upward into the abdomen, to bring more
blood; the warrior went weak in the knees and sank down to
the ground. He coughed harshly, vomiting white fluid. More
moss was brought to wash away the blood, and a stretcher
was prepared behind him; the men chewed strands of cane
to soften them, and these were strung loosely between two
parallel poles braced at each end with three short sticks.
In the first part of the operation the man had remained
entirely stoic, frowning without outcry, and talking now and
then in a quiet, controlled voice. When Tekman Bio bled
him, he did not cry out either, but his face was shrunk with
agony. He ground his teeth loudly, and his toes clawed at
the ground. His resistance was failing fast, as if at any moment he must scream. They had bled him on the field of war
because his wound was thought a serious one; another man
came forward and blew into his ear, oo-Phuh, oo-Phuh.
Pumeka the Woodcutter squatted beside the wounded
man, clutching his own crippled wrist, his merry toothless
face clownish with pity, while Limo, passing, scarcely
glanced aside, erect and expressionless as a god.
They bandaged the man with leaves and laid him in the
stretcher, which had been lined with grass; more grass was
laid on top of him, covering his face, and the whole parcel
lashed around with thongs. Toward dusk the faceless shape
• 193

was borne off through the swamps. He was one of Kurelu's
men, from the north, but the warriors who had treated him
did not know his name.

Siba's boar was sick and finally died. Siba kept
the fact as quiet as possible, so as not to have to share the
meat with the half-hundred people who, getting wind of it,
might happen to pass by, and who, according to the codes
of hospitality, might be refused only with rudeness. The men
of Siba's sili were welcome to a share of it, and a few others
were invited also. The men of U-mue's sili he did not invite,
and most of the latter went out to work in the field of Yeke
Asuk. U-mue himself heard the news of the dead boar from
Aloro when their paths chanced to cross at Homuak, and
though he was annoyed at not having known about the feast
—U-mue likes very much to know of everything—he did not
loiter in the vicinity in order to get invited.

One night not long ago in Wuperainma, Ekali
left the pilai to visit his young wife. Ekali is neither young
nor brave, nor is he as potent as he has been, and this fine
evening his wife decided that she would not receive him.
She barred the door of his ebeai and listened to him shout.
Barring the door is a common recourse of disgruntled
194 •

wives and is usually the occasion for a loud commotion; all
up and down the sili yard the heads pop in and out and
voices fly, and marital disputes on all sides get an airing.
The men take the part of the husband and bellow about
their rights, while the women take advantage of this opportunity to laugh at them. In spite of the fierceness of the din,
almost everyone is amused except the husband, thwarted
at his own portal under the naked moon; since the door is
small and there is no practicable way to force it, he has the
poor choice of retreat or setting fire to his own property.
Unless he is in a position to lend force to his fulminations,
he must retreat, and this is what befell poor Ekali. He did
not even have the satisfaction, in the morning, of thrashing
his young wife soundly with a stick, for he knows very well
that the first time he should try it would be the last. She is a
pretty woman and would not hesitate to run away, for she
can easily find another husband. It is the opinion of her
neighbors that she may leave Ekali soon in any case.

• 195

Tamugi has had a small pig stolen and wanders
about seeking sympathy or staring vacantly at one and all,
as if unable to comprehend his loss, much less the idea that
anyone could play him such a trick. His suspicion is that the
pig was taken by the elege, big wayward youths like Siloba
and Yonokma, and devoured in some dark feast in the
woods, but he cannot account sensibly for this intuition, and
no one takes his anguish very seriously.
The case is reversed with Walimo, whose plight has
worried the whole region. Eight pigs, the entire herd of Walimo and his father Yoli, were taken from the fallow fields
near Hulibara, and this is the least serious aspect of the matter: the pigs were not stolen but seized, in the light of noon,
by men of Amoli, as if the small boy tending them had not
been there at all. Amoli, kain of the Haiman under Maitmo,
lives just across the river in Hulainmo.
The seizure seems to be a provocation on the part of
Maitmo. Walimo can disregard the act, but if he does so he
will be much poorer and he will be thought kepu: even
should this high price be acceptable, his chances of forgiveness would not be improved but lessened.
His alternative is to muster such assistance as he can
and either attempt to retrieve his pigs or seize eight others.
But this is not an ordinary theft, and, since Amoli is very
much more powerful than Walimo, reprisal might well end
in the latter's death. Walimo's father, Yoli, is the village kain
of Huhbara, but he is not a steadfast man, nor is he likely to
stand up strongly for his son: Yoli's first act, when he heard
of his son's peril, was to retire to his new village in the mountains, out of harm's way. And while the men of the southern
196 •

Kurelu are fond of Walimo and give him sympathy, they are
afraid of Maitmo, and they know too that their own war
kain, Wereklowe, shares Maitmo's conviction that Walimo
should be killed. For these reasons, in addition to the fact
that Walimo's guilt is recognized, the chances are that he
will find no friends to help him.
Walimo has lost his careless air, and looks like the
frightened boy he is. His whimsical smile is fleeting and unhappy, and his hand strays continuously about his body, rubbing his knee as he squats, or running a finger along the side
of his nose.

Aku, small net on her back, trudged up into the
mountains to fetch beech fagots and lisanika leaves to wrap
tobacco; she was accompanied by her uncle, Yeke Asuk,
whose work on his fields is temporarily at an end. At Sulaki
they met Huonke starting downhill with a herd of pigs. Yeke
Asuk talked with Huonke while Aku chattered at an old
woman of the village: the woman was preparing banana
stalks for a journey to the salt wells the next day. Strips of
stalk are used to absorb the brine, but before the stalk is
peeled it is scraped down with a rough stick to break its hard
glossy surface. This the old woman was doing. The long
stalk leaned against a rock, while Aku stood on top of the
rock itself, belly and behind gracefully protruded, hands
folded on the top of her quick head. Yeke Asuk hissed at her
to come, and they started off again. Aku kept her hands on
top of her head, and Yeke Asuk marched along with his arms
folded behind his back.
• 197

The slope was grassy, and its limestone soil was reddish
with a tint of iron; on the path the soil was greasy from the
rains, but Aku skipped upward lightly, a new gold skirt of
rushes at her hips. On the spine of the ridge they met two
men bound for the high forest with their adzes. The four
moved eastward, up the slow incline of the rim, to a small
village nestled in a cleft: this was the pig village of Patosaki.
Here, just outside the village, they came upon two crotched
poles, in the clefts of which were rat bodies turning to skeletons in brown, dry nests.
These mountain villages, of which Lokoparek is the
largest, are largely inhabited by pigs and women, who are
put there for their own safekeeping. At Patosaki, which is
owned by Tegearek and Asok-meke, the piglets had been
growing very slowly, and Tegearek at last decided, with the
assistance of Asok-meke, that the failure of the piglets was a
consequence of eating rats. Rats were not bad for pigs,
which hunt out and eat with relish almost anything, but the
ghosts of their rodent victims had banded together in revenge against the pigs and conspired against the piglets'
growth. To warn the rat ghosts that he is on to them, and to
banish their influence from Patosaki, Tegearek had erected
these two poles. If this precaution does not work, Yeke Asuk
informed his niece, then Tegearek will be driven to sterner
measures.
A short distance above Patosaki the clouds awaited
them like mountain fogs, and the forest changed. The forest
was ruled by oaks and beeches: in a weak sunlight glinting
through the mist shone yellow young leaves of the oak and
the new red leaves of the beech, cresting great trees which
arose from a subsidiary gorge beyond the rim.
Aku walked on a narrow spine between two worlds, the
cloud forest below her on her left and the sunlit floor of the
wide valley far below her on her right.
198 •

The woodcutters followed a trail far back into the
beech forest, and Yeke Asuk and Aku pursued them a short
way; they paused among the buttressed roots of tall pale
beeches, awed by the silence of the mossy floors. Strange
bird calls, of a liquid note heard rarely in the valley, rang
here and there, but the only birds visible were parakeets,
hurtling through the canopy in nervous bands, like green
leaves taken wing. In the air, dense as cold smoke, hung the
rich dark fungus smell of mossy earth and wood decay; Aku
wrapped her thin arms about her neck. Around them, sinking beneath beds of moss, lay fallen trunks of beech; the fine
red wood of all these trees, girdled and killed long, long before, would be split and hauled to Patosaki and the villages
below.
Yeke Asuk and Aku wandered toward the rim. Already
Aku had gathered her lisanika, back on the grassy ridges,
and the woolly leaves were tucked into her net; a few steps
earlier she had come on a fresh-fallen limb of beech, and
from this she had snapped and wrestled a large bundle of
good fagots. Aku placed some ferns upon her head, and
Yeke Asuk placed her heavy bundle on the ferns. He preceded his niece along the rim, bandy-legged and self-assured,
his arms still folded behind his back. Once he paused to
powder his shell bib with the white spores of a lycopod;
then on he went, the burdened child tottering behind him
like a bundle of sticks with legs.
They perched on a rock lookout. Behind them, the stone
tools of the woodcutters resounded from the forest, like the
hollow tok . . . tok of the nightjar calling at night from
Homuak. They were now above seven thousand feet, and
Lokoparek lay eight hundred feet below them. They called
out to Aku's father, who was working there—U-mue-a-oo.
U-mue did not answer, but a woman responded with a long,
impassioned outcry; high on their pinnacle, Yeke Asuk and
• 199

Aku nudged each other, laughing. Against the deep mountain silences the words of the woman wandered, and the
voice thinned to a wail of mortal bitterness.

Tekman Bio's tribal father, who lives in the village
of Abulopak, is getting old, and as the holy stones belonging
to him will go to Tekman Bio as well as to his own son, Yonokma, and as it is more suitable that a man move to the village of the stones rather than vice versa, Tekman Bio is
preparing now to move away from Wuperainma. In the past
few weeks he has constructed a new sili leading off the great
yard of Wereklowe, directly opposite the one in which
Weake died. The cooking shed was completed a little while
ago, and today, with the completion of the pilai, a consecration ceremony was held.
In the middle of the morning Tekman Bio, accompanied
by Tuesike, came from Wuperainma with a pig. Polik, who
is Tekman Bio's uncle—they are both of the clan Halluk—
was already at the new sili, and Wereklowe, who has strong
ties with the Halluk, came shortly after, from his own pilai
across the fence.
The kains gathered in the new pilai built sturdily of
chestnut laths and beams of oak, with a cane ceiling and a
cone roof of saplings and thick thatch. Already the pig jaws
of past feasts had been brought from the old pilai of Yonokma's father, and with them his collection of ye stones;
the stones and jaws lined the rear of an otherwise bare wall.
As yet, the new pilai has not acquired the fine dense smell
of tobacco and men and woodsmoke.
200 •

The Halluk's wisakun old men arrived and were greeted
warmly, with handshakes and embraces and the gentle, soft
wah-h, wah-h. Wereklowe, who cannot sit still, fell to splitting bamboo sections to make knives; he used a pig-bone
scraper, pounding it down the length of the upright bamboo
with his gnarled hand. Some of the large sacramental hiperi
for the feast were brought into the hut, and at the sight of
them Polik started a new chant of approval, a short fast
wah-wah-wah, noro-a, noro-a, less because he looked forward to the eating—in the course of a feast Polik is apt to
stand quietly, hands behind his back, observing the seated
men—than because he rarely avoids an opportunity to chant
or sing.
Outside, Tekman Bio and Tuesike, with Yonokma and
his friends, were hacking down banana trees to make room
for the new cooking pit; this part of the yard had not been
cleared as yet and will eventually be occupied by ebeais.
More men arrived, most of them old; there were few warriors other than Tekman Bio's own close friends. The men
passed ceremonially around the group seated before the pilai, taking hands and murmuring low greetings. This courtesy is no less pure for being protocol: the affection is there,
and the will to show it, for these men have counted on one
another in the past and will do so again before too long. A
day earlier a Kosi-Alua had died of an arrow wound suffered
four days before at the Waraba, and in his village, a few
miles across the fields, was seated at this moment in his final
sun. Including Weake, there were now two who would have
to be revenged.
Wereklowe emerged from the pilai with a bow and
arrows, but he did not kill the seven pigs; at the last moment
he presented the bow to one of his men. To kill the pigs is a
small honor which may be transferred, and the man was
surprised and very nervous. His face trembled as he drew
• 20 1

his bow, but nevertheless he worked efficiently, and the pigs
died quickly. The rock fire was ready, and, while it cooked,
the holy stones, wrapped in their packets, were brought to
the new pilai. The rock fire was opened in midafternoon,
and the elege served the hiperi and pig and fern, depositing
the food quietly in the center of grass circles around which
the men sat. As usual, there was no haste or greed; only Siloba's old father, he of the extruded rectum, seemed more
intent on his share of the food than on the talk. He squatted
by himself, small eyes flicking back and forth and old loose
muzzle sliding over and around the shank of bone.
A mild rain came, despite Polik, who called out to the
sky that it should stop: his craggy face was silhouetted on
the storm clouds, the big face of a leader. Hah! Miso Ian!
Hah! Legasin! Rain, go away! At the end of the feast Polik
took grease from the warn wisa and cleaned the holy stones.
The holy stones were now restored, and good fortune would
befall the Halluk warriors.

202 •

Asikanalek's old father, in recent moons, has been
too weak to move from his son's pilai; a woman, taking advantage of this situation, stole hiperi from the old man's garden. The other women caught her at it and were very angry,
and when Asikanalek got wind of it he went out to the gardens and beat her with a stick. The women cheered him on,
and when he gave it up at last and went away, the quiet air
of early afternoon was rent by the squalling of the culprit.
Ekapuwe, the wife of U-mue, was among the spectators and
expressed for some time afterward a loud and cheerful satisfaction over the outcome of the matter. A few weeks later
the guilty woman ran away to the Siep-Kosi.

Kabilek, son of Ekali, who may be twelve, wishes
now to be known to his people as Lokopma. The latter name
will commemorate the death of Kabilek's nami, who was
killed in a Wittaia raid near a stand of lokop cane, or "place
of cane"—lokop-ma. Kabilek sees no reason to retain his
present name, Kabi-lek, which means "Sharp Not," or Dull.
While the people try as best they can to adapt to the frequent name changes, the chances are that Kabilek will
henceforth go by two names rather than one. This is common enough: Asikanalek is also known as Walilo, U-mue as
Wali, Polik as Mokat.
Yeke Asuk too is in the process of a name change,
• 203

though his reasons are quite different. Having been wounded
twice in recent months, he has decided that Yeke Asuk is an
unlucky person and that he will fare better under the name
of Iki, which means "Finger."
A few days after Kabilek and Yeke Asuk decided to
change their names, Tukum announced that he was henceforth to be dealt with under the name of Pua. Tukum lek,
he growled at everyone. An etara Pua. I am called Pua.
When asked the reason for the change, he said, Mel . . .
mel . . . mel , . . Welegat. Unlike all other name words
among the akuni, the word Pua means absolutely nothing,
though Tukum himself insists that it means "Mud."
Some time afterward, Tukum admitted that he had
named himself in memory of his friend Weake; Pua was
short for Puakaloba, the kaio near which Weake had died.

A Wittaia man died in the first days of July, but
he had been wounded in the northern wars, and the southern Kurelu did not consider themselves avenged for the
death of Weake. Revenge had been delayed by weather,
cold and wet, which had continued all through the full
moon. Now two days of sun had dried the land, and a raid
was set in motion. In the early morning of the second day
the men streamed toward the Aike, but only a few of them
were in full view, out in the fields; the rest moved by way of
Homuak, down through the wood and up across the knoll of
Anelarok. From there they descended into the gorge of the
lower Tabara. Across the path was placed a branch which
204 •

pointed at the gorge, to remind those who came after that
they must not take the open path toward the river.
The raiders, led by Wereklowe himself, convened at the
place on the Aike where the natural bridge occurs, above
Puakaloba; they climbed quickly to the top of the Turaba
and disappeared on the far side. Others gathered at Puakaloba itself, and these sang a chant, with ritual weeping,
which might protect the raiders.
We will fight at the Alogalik [between Turaba and Waraba].
Wereklowe! Weaklekek! Hide carefully!
Husuk; take care they do not see your neck, your back,
And you, Tegearek, with that big wife of yours, keep hidden!
Beware, beware of the cutting grass,
Wereklowe! Weaklekek! Keep hidden!
They will hurl their weapons, but be brave,
Keep on!
There would be a wait of several hours while Wereklowe and his men crept down the length of the Turaba, recrossed the river, and stalked the people working in the
Wittaia gardens; if everything worked out, one or more of
these men, women, or children would raise their heads, like
Weake, and see too late the fierce men rushing down on
them with spears.
The sun of the morning disappeared behind low grays;
the clouds drifted at all levels, from the rain smoke in the
gorges to a dirty cumulus high in the east. A falcon came
across the plain and stooped to the crest of a river casuarina;
it perched a moment, turning its dark head. Then it flew on
across the river and alighted on the highest rock of the Turaba. From there, shifting its wings, it glared back across its
shoulder, feathers pressed flat by the southeast wind.
Toward noon men from the northern Kurelu appeared,
slipping down the Tabara or angling out through garden
ditches to crouch near the southern kaios. A few came to
• 205

Puakaloba, strong, heavy warriors with heavy faces, heavy
names. Politely they passed from hand to hand of the waiting men, and, though the precaution was unnecessary, no
voice rose above a whisper, as if the burden of suspense
which must be frightening the creeping raiders should be
shared.
Limo came, striding alone across the gardens; his arrival
caused a stir, and some of the warriors, at his command,
moved off into the woods. Limo feared that too many men
had concentrated at Puakaloba and might give the raid
away. Soon he himself went back into the Aike woods, followed by U-mue. Almost all the best warriors of the southern
Kurelu not with the raiders were already in hiding, until
the moment when they should slip downriver in support of
Wereklowe and his men. Only Yeke Asuk, still complaining
of his wounds, held back, remaining in the shelter with the
old men. Yeke Asuk is brave enough so that he can malinger
from time to time without being called kepu. The old men
spoke rapidly of a kain of the Siep-Elortak; word has drifted
across the hills that the Siep-Elortak were responsible for
Weake's death.
A low whooping rode the wind from a point on the
Turaba; the raid was starting. The warriors gathered in the
woods streamed down along the Aike, between Puakaloba
and the water. They moved low and swiftly in two lines, one
skirting the river bank, the other through the tall grass near
the shelter: Asikanalek, passing, flipped his tobacco roll under the thatch and disappeared again into the grass. In a few
minutes more than a hundred men had come and gone, trailing the long spears by the blades.
Rain came, and with it heavy gusts of wind. The Turaba forms a barrier toward the southeast and keeps this
corner of the valley almost windless, but today the wind was
far stronger than usual, howling audibly through the pocked
206 •

eroded rocks of the badland's summit. From the Aike, farther
down, a scattering of ducks rose as the warriors passed; the
birds swept outward across the gardens, veering wildly in
the tumult of the air.
Maitmo appeared in his roosterish red crest—like Limo,
he had come alone—and paused briefly in the shelter to
smoke. He too spoke excitedly of the Siep-Elortak, and the
other men, most of them old, regarded him with deference
and vague disquiet: they seemed relieved when he got up
and went away downriver.
Soon all but the oldest men moved after him. Below
Puakaloba they crossed a deep inlet of the Aike, up to their
chests, and moved on down along the bank. Already word
had filtered back that Tekman Bio had been wounded. Siba
ran by, followed by young Siloba; Siloba panted loudly in
excitement.
At a sudden rise of rock the old men and yegerek
climbed to the crest; the warriors ran on, across the fields
of Likinapma. Likinapma is a village near the river, abandoned a few seasons past. Its thatch roofs are sagging, and
its banana trees sink away in the surging shrubbery. The
ditches of the gardens have filled in, and the coarse grass has
usurped the plots, bedding them over with gold tussock, for
the village is now in no man's land. It belongs to the men of
U-mue's pilai, but its proximity to the enemy makes it unsafe. Beyond it and below is a wide, low swale of bright
marshy green, ending at a neck of woods; on the far side of
the neck is the Wittaia end of the Tokolik, with a large kaio.
From the wood itself there came shrill howling, and
now a large number of Wittaia burst out upon the swale,
driving back the Kurelu; more Kurelu were strung out along
the trail from the dead village. There was a brief vicious
skirmish and exchange of arrows before both sides suddenly
drew back. The Kurelu on the rock crest, like those at the
• 207

gate of the old village and on the swale itself, stood in silence in a cold, driving rain. They watched the Wittaia, who
had formed a large leaping circle and were chanting in etai.
The raid had not avenged Weake, and a Kurelu had
been killed. Four or five other men were wounded. Already
the injured hobbled or were carried back, one after the
other. One was Tekman Bio with a spear through his front
thigh, another Siba with an arrow in his leg, a third Wereklowe's wild-smiling son; Wereklowe's son had been speared
twice, in the back and side.
The dead man was Yonokma, who, with Tekman Bio,
was to inherit the pilai and holy stones of his old father in
Abulopak. Yonokma was a stocky, cheerful boy, close friend
of Siloba, and he had been in the advance raid. The raiders
had attacked a garden, chasing the Wittaia into a wood; the
Wittaia had rallied in the wood and waited in ambush for
pursuers. The frustrated Kurelu had rushed ahead, Yonokma
in the lead, and in a furious fight Yonokma had been cut
off; he was set upon and speared, over and over.
Already word had flown back to the villages, and a few
Wilil women crept out across the fields. Wailing softly, arms
around their necks, they sat on the high rocks in the rain,
like owls. Far below the men stood in groups, staring at the
woods into which the Wittaia had disappeared. Not only
was Yonokma dead, but the Wittaia had his body: the warriors waited in the cold to see what the enemy meant to do.
The Wittaia could very well have thrown Yonokma's
body into a field to rot, but they did not do so, less out of
courtesy than because, should they do so, Yonokma's ghost
would never leave their territory: they called out that they
wished to return the body. Meanwhile, in the shelter of the
woods, they went on with their etai, in full view of the waiting Kurelu.
Kurelu himself came back alone across the marsh and
208 •

climbed into the rocks. With the rest he gazed back for a
time toward the woods, then went on down the far side of
the rock and began his long walk home.
A band of Wittaia left the wood, bearing the body of
Yonokma. The group hurried toward the battle line, escorted
by dancing warriors. The Kurelu came forward, and both
sides feinted with spears, but no arrows were exchanged.
The Wittaia dropped the body in the grass and fled, for the
Kurelu immediately attacked. In the fighting the Wittaia
were driven back toward the woods, and under cover of the
melee the body was retrieved, and a man ran forward with
a brand and some dry thatching and set a fire where it had
lain: thick smoke billowed up against the high Wittaia hills.
The body was carried back a little way and laid to earth
while the warriors conferred; in a few minutes it was picked
up again and hurried toward the old village, and its second
resting place burned behind it. The rain had stopped, but
the air was very cold; it was nearly dark. The line of men
accompanying the body paused at the village, where a
stretcher was constructed; the body was wrapped in grass
between two poles and carried on. One of the bearers was
Siloba, Yonokma's friend. The procession went northward
across the fields to the central kaio, the people falling into
line behind it.
A young pig had been brought out from the villages; it
was killed as the stretcher came near. The body was put
down and warm blood from the pig rubbed on it. Then
U-mue, outlined against the silver sky of rainy twilight, shot
four arrows over the body toward Wittaia land, one to the
northwest, one due west, and two over Yonokma's head, toward the southwest, where he had died: the arrows would
drive back all unfriendly ghosts which might have trailed
the body. The stretcher was taken up again and carried back
toward the villages under the mountain wall.
• 209

• Like most of the elege, Yonokma had lived in
many pilais but, since U-mue's wife Koalaro was his elder
sister, he stayed most commonly in Wuperainma. For this
reason his loss was as upsetting to the WiliI as it was to his
own Halluk. The fact of Yonokma's death and Tekman Bio's
wounding but five days after the consecration of their holy
stones would decrease the power and prestige of the stones,
which would now go to Tekman Bio.
The death was thought of as a most important one, not
only because Yonokma had been brave and a good warrior
but because his death compounded the grief and bitterness
caused by the killing of Weake, because he was one of
"Werek's" men, and because he had been widely known and
liked; the mourning was entirely serious. Even Maitmo came
from the northern Kurelu, though he stood off by himself
and was not a part of the gathering of southern kains before
the pilai.
All day the mourning rose and fell, counterpointed by
the split of wood and the clacking of wood tongs on the rock
fires. The women's requiem was soft and steady, while inside the pilai the old kains sighed and quavered in a harmony resonant and old. From time to time the younger men
took up the chant, in a strong, pure refrain, as if all breathed
together.
The moaning persisted until late afternoon, though it
was weary now, and stray voices of the women rose brokenly
from the rest. One sang out of harmony with her sisters,
Yay-y, yay, egh-egh-egh. Often the women's wail began
with a single uttered word hurled out as a point of departure: nyerakenare-e-e, ay, ay, hitu nan a-ay-ay, egh-egh-

2 10 •

egh. The nyerakenare is the long shell belt; hitu nan—fireeaten—described the burning which would come.
The nets were removed, the chair dismantled. Yonokma
was carried back to the banana fronds before the pilai.
There Tuesike supported him while others greased him,
while the laths were brought and stacked, while the pyre
rose. Pigs squealed hungrily in the stalls, and the restless infants caterwauled. At the pyre the adzes rang, and a clamor
rose over the mourning.
Yonokma was hurried to the fire, and a howl like fear
vibrated on the windless air. The men worked in the smoke,
adjusting him on his side, and finally they fell back, staring,
for there was no more to be done. The fire burned slowly and
badly, and it was near twilight before the flames took hold
and rose into the sky.
The one-eyed Aloka had retreated to the hill above before the funeral had ended. There, on a grassy knoll, singing
to himself, the boy built a toy sili out of twigs and grass,
complete with entrance way and fence. He hunched over
it, content, staring and picking at what he had accomplished.
The sinking sun fell through the western clouds and gleamed
on the savanna pools with promise of fair weather. Below
the hill where Aloka was playing, the flames turned cold and
thin, and dark figures hurried back and forth through a thick
smoke.

• Nylare, U-mue's daughter by Koalaro, was one
little girl certain to lose her fingers, for not only was Koalaro
the sister of the dead boy, but Nylare had never undergone
• 211

iki palin and was of age to do so. At dawn she accompanied
her mother from Wuperainma to Abulopak, under a fresh
pink and blue dawn sky.
The sun had not yet fired the mountain rim, and in
Abulopak the sili yard lay in a dense blue shadow. Two old
women squatted at the funeral embers, picking out the
bones with tongs, while other women and small children
filled the entrances of the cooking shed, their backs to the
warm smoke. Hugunaro and Yuli came with hiperi, and as
the sun touched the bushes outside the village, then the village door itself, other women clambered through this entrance, all sticks and string and knees. Aku had come with
Nylare and strolled about with her arm around her little
sister's shoulder.
In the pilai the kain men sat, nursing their cold bones
around the fire. One of them, in slow, measured strokes,
raked bits of wood and ash onto fat hiperi placed side by
side among the embers. No agreement had been reached as
to which children were to undergo iki palin, for this was an
important matter involving pigs and shells and obligations.
In the yard a tall man smeared with yellow clay arrived
alone. Standing near the funeral ashes where the two women
were picking bones, he burst into loud mourning. Strangely,
he had carried his spear with him into the yard and held it
upright while he cried, a breach of custom probably caused
by confusion and distress. This was Yonokma's nami, from
the Siep-Kosi, who had come across the hills for the second
day of the funeral. The women near the stranger's feet and
those collected in the yard—there were fifty or sixty—took
up the man's mourning in a low chorus of their own, and big
Woknabin came forward to join him. Woknabin is a friendly
man, and his gesture seemed intended, at least in part, to
spare the man from far away from having to sing alone
among the women.
212 •

The women, even as they mourned, investigated the
pile of ceremonial nets heaped up before them, and soon
their wails turned into chatter. Hugunaro sat at one end of
the nets, leading negotiations. Koalaro was on the inner circle, her blunt hand on Nylare's small shoulder. Nylare stared
about her out of round dark eyes, a miniature figure in the
humped avid circle of brown flesh. After a while she spoke
to Oluma, who stood nearby, next to his mother; their heads
were on a level with the women's. Across the circle, Loliluk's
wife listened intently to Hugunaro, in no way distracted by
her small son Natorek, who was drumming on her head with
a piece of bark. Hugunaro was sifting through the nets, discussing each with everyone; the discussion was quiet until
joined by Ekapuwe who, arriving late, made a place for herself quickly. The young wife Yuli stayed aside, straying idly
where the men might see her and keeping her own dim
counsel.
Ekapuwe confined herself, at first, to an ill-tempered
and contemptuous dismissal of Hugunaro's authority; for a
while she kept her back half turned, tossing remarks over
her shoulder. Hugunaro took notice of this, and her own
voice grew hard; Hugunaro's large eyes are in no way gentle,
and clearly she has little taste for avoiding trouble. Within
a few minutes the voices of U-mue's wives dominated all the
rest, and at one point both women had risen to their knees,
each clutching one end of the same net. Yeke Asuk, observing the rivals from the far end of the yard, squealed in hoarse
hushed laughter, clenching two fingers in his teeth in a
pantomime of terror. From time to time akuni women go at
one another with their sticks, almost always over a man, but
this prospect was avoided by the appearance of a crone. It
was she who was to distribute the nets, and Hugunaro and
Ekapuwe subsided.
The old woman stood among her seated sisters, leaning
• 213

on a stick, a ragtag of nets twice her own bulk collected like
blown trash on her bent back. In a weak voice, as each net
was passed up to her, she uttered the name of a woman; she
was tottery and confused, and the real business was transacted around her legs by younger women. Another old
woman, cold as a dawn lizard, crept into the sun's warmth:
the sun gleamed on the ranks of naked shoulders and fired
the rusty heads of the small children.
The iki palin was now postponed a day, until its principals could be determined, but the real reason for the delay
was a reluctance on the part of the kains to take on further
obligations: the giving of one's daughter's fingers is worth a
small pig or shell belt, but, unlike other gifts, a small child's
finger is not currency. The waiving of the iki palin is quite
unusual in a funeral of such importance, and U-mue is already hinting darkly that Wereklowe, in discouraging the
women from the ceremony, is we-ak—bad. But as it has been
put off a day, and thus lost its order in the ritual, the chances
are that the iki palin will not occur at all. The women's feast
will proceed as usual, and the banishment of the ghost will
occur for several days to come, but U-mue's Nylare and the
other children will keep their fingers for a little longer.

214 •

Just after dark, Yonokma's ghost paid a visit
to Wuperainma. The men of U-mue's pilai were at the fire,
and the shadow of the ghost passed along the wall, then up
into the loft. There was a stir of exclamation and uneasiness.
Yonokma's ghost should have been in the land of the Wittaia,
causing trouble, and while the men did not feel it wished
them harm—indeed, they laughed about it when light came
again—its restlessness seemed a bad omen.
The next morning an armed party went out to the floating marsh beyond the abandoned village, to the point where
the Wittaia had brought the body. While the enemy jeered
at them from the hill beyond, they gathered and burned the
grass near every place where the body had lain, to make
sure no drop of blood had been overlooked. U-mue himself
was there, looking worried and morose. The people are
stunned by the bad circumstances of Yonokma's death, and
the inevitable revenge has yet to be attempted, as if first
they must determine why their sacred powers have forsaken
them.

Uwar and Tukum, Okal and his friend Weneluke,
and Supuk went on a crayfish hunt in a grassy little stream
which trickles down past the salt-burning rocks and around
the fences of Wuperainma, through the grove and down
• 2 15

into the gardens. They arrived at the brook on the run and
leapt into it with a great shout, though the stream, even in
time of flood, is rarely more than two feet wide and one foot
deep. Coming down off the steep bank, Tukum misjudged
the opening and hurt his leg; he sat dolefully in the grass,
feet in the water, consoling himself, uncertain about crying.
The boys moved quickly up the stream, extravagant and
inefficient in their power; they felt in the mud with their
swift feet, darted their hands under the grassy banks, and
flew ahead. Soon Kabilek came and joined them, leaving his
pigs to fend for themselves. Kok-meke! Kok-meke! they cried
out—Big one! Big one!—and in a file, Tukum zigzagging in
the rear, they would crowd and pummel into one small lead,
leaving untouched long stretches of stream behind them. In
the shadows of the grass, facing each other as they probed,
the tops of two heads would press together in concentration.
Weneluke found a first small crayfish, and because Weneluke is a sissy his feat irritated Uwar; he hurled grass
spears at Weneluke in false playfulness, while Weneluke,
backing off, smiled miserably. Kok-meke! Kok-meke! Tukum
cried, for no reason at all, and the boys rushed ahead, darting upstream through grass and sedge and the wild sugar
cane.
Namilike came flitting past, correcting the vagaries of
her pigs by smiting the burly creatures with a fern. For some
piggish reason they minded her, and she danced away behind them, calling out to the other children over her shoulder.
At Wuperainma, Oluma and Natorek came out to watch,
as did Eken, who strayed down along the path from Homaklep. Eken's left ear is smeared with clay, and she kept touching it with her short fingers, for in the last day or two it has
been cropped, in a belated gesture toward Yonokma. Eken
2 16 •

joined briefly in the hunt herself. But, drunk with the fellowship of their male associates, her swineherd companions
paid no attention to her. Eken soon fell behind, then stopped
entirely, plucking a grass stem and working it in her fingers
in the lonely sun of childhood's afternoon.
More crayfish were captured, to fierce cries, the largest
of them two inches in length. Some large dragonfly nymphs
were caught as well, and these were eaten on the spot; the
crayfish would be broiled upon the fire.
Now and then the hunt was interrupted by a cry of
Puna! or Pelal!—at which the children would explode out
of the ditch: the puna is the large frilled lizard, and the
pelal any sort of snake, and the yegerek affect great fear of
them, to render life more perilous. In their glee in the face
of danger, they are like the men in war. But the cries had
been raised by Uwar and were probably baseless, for Uwar
is bored readily; he likes to tease and disconcert the other
children, who have retained their innocence.
Uwar has intelligence and charm, courage and great
prowess with grass spears, and he is beautiful, but he is a
child no longer, and a mean streak gleams in him which may
only be the first sense of his own power. Again he fired grass
spears at Weneluke, who again wilted in the face of it, and
now, still smiling in his wild, bright-eyed way, he hurled
missiles at the rest. The little boys raised their heads out of
the grass and stared at him. Tukum growled fiercely, breaking off in his pride a fat bundle of spears which his instinct
told him not to throw; like the great frogmouth in the woods
of night, he huffed and squawked in a hideous voice, depending on the terrible nature of his appearance to dissuade
attackers. Kabilek and Supuk, though in no way timid, are
gentle children, without Uwar's itch, and fought back mildly
until the storm should pass.
• 217

Okal, on the other hand, is a contender: he popped up
out of the grass, thin shoulders smeared with the yellow clay
of war and death, and fired spears until Uwar himself affected boredom. But the spell of the hunt had been broken,
and the boys regarded one another in discomfort. They dispersed.

Eak, the old father of Asikanalek and the grandfather of Namilike, died during the night. He had shrunk
away to nothing, and when his body was seated against the
wall he looked no bigger than a child. In the morning he was
draped with shell belts, like an old packet badly wrapped.
Sitting there in the brown darkness where his life had ended,
he was reduced by the dim light to a strange pattern of white
luminescent cowrie shells, as if, after all, he had gone away
long ago.
Eak had been decorated in the pilai because he was an
old man and had died naturally; the mourning would be no
more than a formality, like the funerals of women. No chair
was to be built, no fingers cut, and two small pigs would
honor him. A few people came to grieve, but most of these
were neighbors from Homaklep and Wuperainma, come out
of respect for Asikanalek. Werene wore a head-net of fresh
spider webs, acquired by rolling his hair through the vast
gossamers of a large spider harbored in banana groves for
just this purpose.
Since there was no chair to mourn before—the old man
218 •

was kept all day in the pilai—the men mourned at the fire
of rocks. Tamugi, who loves to grieve, came and ululated
like a dog, but no one else mourned for very long, and many
came who did not mourn at all. U-mue sat glumly in the
pilai with Weaklekek and Wereklowe. Since the cooking pit
was not ready and the men were hungry, they roasted sweet
potatoes on the pilai fire, oblivious of the choking smoke.
In the dense pall, Eak's body floated eerily.
The children moved cheerfully about the yard. Namilike herself fled happily from group to group, self-conscious
and a little spoiled; at one point she nearly choked herself
over the embers, attempting to light tobacco for a woman
guest. Wamatue leaned against the entrance, sad-faced and
solitary, his miniature horim in its usual offset position.
Altogether about fifty people had arrived in time for
the opening of the pit.
The eating finished, the belts were stripped from Eak
and brought outside, where they were distributed by Weaklekek; though Wereklowe was present, he was an honorary
guest, and it is Weaklekek who is head of the Alua in the
three villages near the Aike frontier. One of the belts was
awarded to Tuesike, who sat down with it, smiling modestly,
near other men and yet somehow not with them; when the
belt ceremony was at an end, Tuesike seized the chance to
help Eak's kinsmen build the pyre. Because Tuesike is quiet
and not articulate, yet wishes to take part in things, he often
does much of the heavy work at other people's ceremonies.
Eak was brought out of the pilai, carried like an injured
child. His face was composed and pure. In the light of day
it was discovered that two cowries were still fastened to his
collar; a delay occurred while these were tugged at, and
finally the neckband had to be cut free. Because the fire was
already burning, the tugging had been hasty; it shattered
• 219

the serenity of the funeral, not only in its own implications
but because, during the process, the old man's mouth fell
open wide and his eyes bulged, as if suddenly he had come
to life and glimpsed the pyre. An uneasy murmur swept the
women, who were seated in a line under the eaves.
As a final courtesy, and to placate Eak's spirit, his body
had been smeared for the last time with grease. Shiny and
hairless, he was hurried to the pyre. The men tucked Eak
down among the logs with something like affection, and at
this late moment a real grieving began. As if to compensate
the dead old man for their long day of apathy, the men and
women sobbed and wailed in earnest. In this desiccated
thing they seemed to glimpse themselves, just for a moment;
this was the way that all of them would go, under a blue sky,
in a late twilight.

220 •

• The children of Wuperainma engaged in the
morning tussle with the village pigs, shouting and banging
and hissing and squealing through the pig stalls and the
yard and in the weeds outside. Loliluk's pretty Werekma,
running through the bushes to cut off a sow, ran afoul of
excrement; she squeaked with distaste and chagrin and fled
to clean her foot, while the younger children laughed; Werekma, who may marry at the next mauwe, has been giving
herself airs.
The children were watched dourly by Ekapuwe, her
baby creaking in her net—Ekapuwe is restless and is looking at the men—and by Loliluk, who is crippled these days
by the long infection of a spear wound in his hip; the hip has
collapsed rather than swollen, as if his body were slowly being eaten out from the inside. Suddenly the man is old and
squats, staring at nothing, or creeps about his yard among
the women. Perhaps this is age, which comes on early in the
valley, as if the eternal spring burned lives out swiftly. Loliluk may be thirty-five. At forty-five he will be a village elder,
and at fifty-five, if he is still alive, he will be a decrepit and
spindly old man.
The elder wife of Loliluk is a woman of the Wukahupi,
a people down the valley, on the far side of the Baliem.
Through their success in killing and pig-stealing, the Wukahupi had incurred the violent anger of the Huwikiak; the
latter joined forces with the Wittaia and other tribes and, in
a rare maneuver, attacked the Wukahupi villages at night,
killing and burning. The Wukahupi fought back, but their
allies failed to come to their assistance. They shall be scattered like the mokoko heron, the kain of the Huwikiak had
• 221

said, and indeed they were scattered all across the valley:
they had even lost their tribal name and were now known
as the Mokoko. The wife of Loliluk was one of several Mokoko women among the Kurelu.
In recent moons this woman had grown weak and sick,
with bad internal pains, and lately she has been called Wako
Aik, which means "Worm Biting in the Stomach." Her people are very worried, and early this morning a hunt took
place in the savannas below the village. The hunters were
not content with rats but caught small songbirds, for the
ritual to come was very serious.
Loliluk, with Hanumoak and Yeke Asuk, went out in
the moming-of-bird-voices, followed by Uwar and Kabilek;
Uwar is the son of Wako Aik, but the mother-son relationship is not emphasized, and Uwar was as lighthearted as
ever. The men were joined by Walimo and Asukwan, and
the boys were joined by other yegerek. All these people came
along for the fun of throwing sticks.
Songbirds are hunted in a kind of bush-beating or drive.
Each hunter breaks off several lengths of madder or other
branching shrub and strips the leaves. The party forms a
driving line through the tall grass, or encircles a brushy
copse; when the birds fly out they are met with a hail of
missiles. The boys and men, trained from infancy to hurl
spears of grass, then cane, then wood, throw with great
force and skill, and though few birds are retrieved—the small
bodies are easily lost in the dense undergrowth and grass—
a surprising number are brought down.
The sun pierced dull black clouds over the cliff and
caught the red leaves of vaccinium; the leaves and grasses
were wet with the night rain, and the sun, still low, brought
the whole world sparkling to life. The men were haloed bythe sun's gleam on their shoulders; they stalked the bushes,
arms cocked, saying Hoo-sha, Hoo-sha. A gray rail fluttered
222 •

up, wavering slowly before Yeke Asuk; it was the first easy
shot, and the others laughed and hooted when he missed it.
Three birds were soon recovered. Wrapped in neat leaf
packets, they were borne back in triumph to Wuperainma.
It was agreed that the spirit of Wako Aik had deserted
her, and that ceremonies must be held to lure the spirit back.
Yoli's wife, a well-known woman wisakun, was called in to
assist, and Yoli, his expansive self once more now that the
danger brought on him by his son Walimo seemed less imminent, came along to help eat up the pig.
The pig was slaughtered in the early afternoon and was
butchered by Tuesike, who came in to help. Behind the
fence, in the banana grove, a small rock fire was built and
the small pig placed in it, with sweet potato. Werekma
helped build the fire, after she and Uwar had cleaned pig
guts. Aku watched them from a doorway, but she and the
other children took no part.
During the cooking, the men gathered in U-mue's pilai.
They talked, and Yoli wove at a long shell belt. Loliluk asked
Hanumoak for a feather of egret, and this he sent with Uwar
to his ebeai. Yeke Asuk went down into the wood; he returned with three saplings and with these constructed a
kind of sturdy tripod, in which the largest pole, almost erect,
was braced by the two others. Loliluk called out to the
women, who were in the ebeai of Ekapuwe. The sick woman
appeared with the egret feather in her hair. She was draped
with nets, and the men withdrew to the end of the yard: this
was a woman's ceremony, and they had no part in it.
The pig had been killed because spirits, like people, cannot resist the smell of cooking pig. The tripod, which Wako
Aik now mounted with the help of others, was to render her
as nearly airborne as possible; the spirit is a flying thing and
might be more prone to re-enter a body found in its own element. Natorek was handed up to his mother, and she held
• 223

him, not because he would be of much assistance in the cure,
but because he was underfoot and threatened to jostle the
tripod; Natorek clung for dear life to the longest pole, enjoying himself hugely. Finally Wako Aik was handed a bow
and arrow by Yoli's wife; she clutched them for half a minute while this woman muttered healing imprecations. She
was then relieved of both bow and Natorek and helped back
down to earth. She went into the ebeai with the bow and
arrow, followed by Yoli's wife and Loliluk. The other women
went into the cooking shed, and Yeke Asuk returned into
the pilai.
The egret feather worn by Wako Aik had been a sign,
a first warning to the bad spirits which infested her that they
were unwelcome. The bow and arrow was a second warning: perceiving by this weapon that she was armed against
them, they would certainly by frightened off. The next morning the rout of the bad spirits, represented by the hunted
birds, was made complete: the birds were laid upon the
ground, and Wako Aik attacked them with her hiperi stick,
dancing around and jabbing the air over the bodies.
The ceremony over, the birds lost their significance and
were eaten by the men.
The next day the women held a hiperi feast to bring to
a close the banishment of Wako Aik's illness. The women
themselves built the fire, assisted by Ekali. Ekali's wife
worked opposite him, hauling with more strength than his
own on the rattan binding. The rain began before the fire
was completed, but they finished it hastily and retired to
the cooking shed, leaving it smoking in the yard. Although
the women had worked merrily together—a merriment from
which Ekali had been excluded—they sat around their separate fires, once inside.
There are five fires in the cooking shed. The two at the
west end, nearest the sili entrance, belong to old Aneake and
224 •

whichever of U-mue's wives are present: Aneake sat at the farthest fire, weaving a net dyed purple and bright yellow.
Aneake is having trouble these days with her etai-eken,
which is giving her stomach ache, but she is impatient rather
than complaining, as if she had only to speak to it in her
spirited way for it to cease its nonsense. She is a hot-tempered
little person, and her name, derived from ane-weak, or
"Voice Bad," suits her at certain moments very well: she
maintained a rapid peevish chattering. Two of Aneake's
neighbors, younger than herself, were far sicker than she
was: Asok-meke, the stepfather of Tukum, had not even
been able to attend the pilai consecration of Tekman Bio,
and a special wisakun man had been sent for from the SiepKosi. As for one old woman of Abulopak, she was not far
from death. Within a few days she would be bundled up in
her own nets and given to the flames.
With Aneake sat Hugunaro and Aku, and Hugunaro's
smoky laughter and her wild, hard eye tightened the whole
atmosphere. At the next fire Ekali's wife and the second wife
of Loliluk sat in dull silence. With them was the boy Weneluke, and Werekma, and Natorek: Natorek, though prostrate
on his stomach, and despite the fact that Werekma was behind him, contrived to strike her with a stick. The movement
was a strange, rubbery, convulsive one, peculiar to this boy,
and possibly it was unintentional, but Natorek has a bad
character and was not given the benefit of the doubt: Werekma spanked him smartly where he lay. Werekma promises
to be a scold; she is just coming into puberty and young
breasts, and the put-upon air that so often accompanies female adolescence; hence the talk that she will be married
at the next mauwe. However, she is still young, perhaps
twelve, and the talk for the moment is mostly for its own
sake.
Wako Aik, looking disconsolate and weak, came and
• 225

squatted by the fire of the younger wife: though there appears to be no animosity between them, the latter chose this
occasion to move down to the next fire. The young wife, a
thin-faced, withdrawn girl who looks discontented without
quite knowing why, is presently nursing a small baby. Wearing taro leaves upon her head in a kind of bonnet, she
watched the other women without interest. She had removed her nets, and on her small shoulders and round back
shone the silk skin of girlhood, for she is no more than a
child.
The boy Weneluke wove hand patterns with a string,
working it skillfully into abstract designs on all eight fingers:
one of these represented a man and woman facing each
other, and, by manipulating each sex, he arrived at a nice
parody of copulation. Self-consciously Werekma tossed her
head, and the uneasy boy grinned furtively at his own talent.
Awaiting the baking of the food, the women ate toa
stalks and rolled fiber thread. They laughed and chatted
peacefully in the fine warmth, out of the rain.

Asukwan of Homaklep is a strong, indolent warrior with a huge head of hair and a heroic nose made fierce
by its black band of charcoal; his handsome demeanor,
coupled with a rare talent for grinding his teeth, have made
him much admired by the women. But these days Asukwan
is plagued by an old arrow wound in his ankle which does
not heal, as well as a fresh arrow wound in the back of the
same leg, suffered in the raid in which Yonokma lost his life;
226 •

he is reduced to hobbling about with a heavy walking stick,
a kind of club, used commonly by men recuperating.
Finally he went to old Elomaholan, the wisakun. Like
almost all medical treatments of the akuni, his cure would
be external and spiritual in nature, though there is an internal medicine imported from the Yali which is taken sometimes for arrow wounds. Asukwan sat on the council ledge
above Homuak, while Elomaholan, hunched on his knees
over the wounds, fingered each in order. As he massaged,
he blew on the wounds, oo-Phuh, oo-Phuh, and between
puffs chattered a litany of healing words: the simultaneous
nature of his treatments soon had him short of breath. Now
and again he would raise his head and inquire of Asukwan
in a soothing manner about other factors that might influence the treatment, and Asukwan answered him seriously,
brow furrowed in concentration, with the modest selfimportance of the ill.
Asukwan was still hobbling on his cane when, on the
afternoon of the women's feast, he caught and raped the wife
of Palek, mother of the boy Supuk; this is the same woman
who was almost killed by the akuni after fleeing the Wittaia.
Palek did not wish to remain with Asukwan in the same sili,
and that same day he moved his family away to Wuperainma. Palek is a kepu man with neither wealth nor power,
while Asukwan is a warrior of Weaklekek's pilai: to demand
a pig of Asukwan in compensation could only lead to further
ignominy. It is not a question of Weaklekek's lending support to a man who is in the wrong, for Asukwan is not really
in the wrong. Asukwan took Palek's wife because his strength
gave him that right; the only wrong involved is Palek's weakness.
Though Asukwan is young, he has a history of disorder
in his love life. Only last year a wife of Amoli, the fierce kain
of the Haiman, was so overcome by Asukwan's imposing ap• 227

pearance that she ran away to join him in Homaklep. Amoli
demanded her return and at last came to fetch her, bringing
with him an armed party. A skirmish took place in which
several men were wounded, but in the end the love-drunk
woman was still with Asukwan. This episode, unresolved in
the eyes of Amoli, is one of a number at the seat of trouble
between north and south.

The only salt available to the Kurelu occurs in a
briny spring on the mountainside two hours north of Homuak. Weaklekek's wives set out early in the morning, taking with them banana fiber to absorb the brine. Lakaloklek's
daughter Eken accompanied the women, and with her came
two other girls from the sili of Werene. Supuk also went
along, accompanied by Tukum. Weaklekek went too, for to
reach the salt wells the party would have to traverse the territories of Amoli and Maitmo; the enmities between north
and south had been building again in recent days over the
episode of Walimo and his pigs, and Weaklekek wished to
protect his women. The party was joined before it had got
very far by Woluklek and Siloba, who, as usual, were on the
lookout for some distraction to occupy their minds.
Despite the time of the full moon, the rains had been
very heavy, and the paths across the fields and around the
villages were waterlogged and greasy. At the sloughs and
ditches the pole bridges were slick with mud, but nevertheless the burdened women and the men moved quickly, as
they always did, in a fast walk which was almost a short
228 •

trot; with centuries of instinct in their feet, they could run
the thin poles with scarcely a break in pace. Very shortly
they came to the Elokera River, just south of the place where
it bends outward from the mountain wall toward the Baliem.
Here, in a grove of fig and myrtle trees, a large myrtle had
been felled across the river, which flows about five feet below the log. The grove is on the farther side, with shady
grass beneath the trees and a bank where the people go to
drink.
The Elokera is the tacit boundary between the Kurelu
of north and south. The two groups, regardless of close ties
of clan and family, are dominated by separate kains; in the
old days, despite their ties, they feuded regularly, and even
now they rarely overlook a chance to quarrel. The northern
villages threaten constantly to deny the southerners access
to the salt wells, and this too is a source of trouble and the
subject of a southern song:
We wish to go to Iluerainma
But the men of the north forbid us.
Forget them, then, we will not help them in their wars. . . .
Near the west bank of the Elokera, not far from the
grove, is the village of Hulainmo, run by Amoli. The party
skirted Amoli's village and kept going.
The trail went west under the mountains, across old
fields and shrubby grasslands, down across a quiet stream
and up again through a small wood of araucaria and chestnut. The travelers were passing now through the lands of
Kurelu, and one of his villages, where four or five of his
eleven wives are kept, lay in sight on the savanna. The trail
approached the mountains at the mouth of a steep gorge;
here Weaklekek and the young warriors sat down under a
tree to wait, while the women and children went on upward
to the well.
• 229

The mountain trail to the salt well and onward to the
Yalimo is worn down to bare rock, and the rock itself is
polished smooth by the generations of bare feet; in many
places it is stained with purple, for juices dripping from the
burdens of soaked fiber have this color. Among the stones
wind exposed roots, these also polished smooth; the roots
change, as the path ascends, to the beech and oak of the
mossy forest. Here the strange stiltroot pandanus fills the
clearings. The trail itself is bordered with deep greens—ferns
and lilies, orchids and begonias, glistening with that ageless
damp and splendor peculiar to the silver air of mountain
gorges—the whole infused with the warm, secret smell of
wood decay and fungus. Below the trail flows the bouldered
stream, its white rush smothering the calls of birds in a huge
silence. The water voice is a forest voice, part of the rocks
and greens and filtered light; near where Weaklekek waited,
the water voice would die. The stream would wander in
slow sun and silent grass, seeking the river, the broad lowlands, and the sea.
The bent women crept upward on the rocks, dark
bodies muted by the shades. Light fell in shafts and splinters,
in warm pools of green gold. Here and there the trail traversed the stream on boulders slick with algae, and on one
of these the child Eken's foot went out from under her, so
that she landed on her head. Her woolly red-black hair protected her, though she was shaken; she cried quietly and
briefly. Lakaloklek tied a bow of grass and laid it on the
rock in warning. Another bow, half rotten now, lay there beside it.
Not far below the crest of the pass lies the salt spring,
Iluerainma. This is one of two salt springs in the valley; the
other is far off to the southward, in another country. The,
spring occurs in the stream itself, in a clearing formed by a
broad outcropping of boulders. A pool has been dammed,
230 •

and here the women descend into the water. There are always women at the salt wells, sometimes forty or fifty at a
time, and from the bank comes a steady whack and chop—
the breaking up of the small banana stalks with flat wood
knives. The dark pool is small, scarcely ten feet across, and
so the women must stand and bend and press together, the
pale fibers floating at their knees. The gloom of the cloud
forest and the packed, straining flesh, the primal browns and
the salt waters from the inner earth, are somehow infernal—
and a butterfly passes, a magenta scrap of light, like the tip
of a wand.
When the cargo is well soaked it is carried back down
to the villages; dried in the sun, it is then burned on a special
salt rock behind Wuperainma. The gray residue of salt and
ash will be packed away in neat leaf bottles and stored for
use at feasts.
Lakaloklek, finished with her work, sat on a rock and
smoked. Then she rose slowly with her wet heavy load and
started homeward. At the mouth of the pass Weaklekek
joined them silently, and they moved southward swiftly
through the fields.

This morning the pigs of Walimo were returned to
him, at the end of a dangerous sequence of events.
Three men of Amoli appeared yesterday at Homuak,
where Walimo and Husuk and several others of the southern
Kurelu were at the fire. The three declared to anyone who
would listen that the reason Walimo's pigs had been taken
• 231

was that Walimo had stolen one of theirs, and not only that,
but Walimo had made improper advances to one of the
wives of Amoli, who had already lost a wife to Walimo's
friend, the young warrior Asukwan.
Walimo listened in silence for a time. Then, without
a word, he grabbed two spears which leaned on a near araucaria and drove one of the men out of the grove; in the
course of the chase he succeeded in spearing this man in the
thigh. The other two left promptly.
When the wounded man was brought back to Hulainmo,
Amoli became enraged; Amoli is known as hunuk palin, a
man of violence. He knew already that Weaklekek's party
had passed by early that morning on the way to the salt
wells, and he also knew exactly who was in the party: Siloba
and Woluklek were both friends of Walimo, and it was immediately decided to waylay the party on its return and kill
whichever one might tarry or wander aside. If this was not
possible, one of the small children would do as well, especially Tukum, whose father is dead, and from whose clan a
less serious reprisal might be expected.
Near Kurelu's village Weaklekek was stopped on his return by an old woman. The woman knew only that a man
had been speared in the southern country and that there
might be trouble.
Weaklekek went on. He stopped every man he met, in
order to make inquiries. Many avoided him, and the others
gazed at him and at his people in an uneasy and embarrassed
way. He learned at last that he was walking straight into an
ambush. The party halted for a little while and talked, but
for want of a better choice—they were deep in unfriendly
territory, with no way to slip off or hide—it was decided to
proceed.
People were now openly avoiding them, stepping off the
232 •

path a long way ahead. The villages they passed, in the oily
haze of the hot afternoon, were silent. They went onward,
single file, across the wide savanna, the women and children
herded close, and the men before them and behind. All but
Weaklekek and Woluklek were frightened: Woluklek walked
jauntily, lifting his feet high off the ground in an unconscious
parody of himself, a coy, self-deprecating smile on his strange
face.
Weaklekek guessed that the ambush would occur at the
Elokera, near Amoli's village, for this crossing could not be
avoided, and there was a cover of heavy cane a short distance
from both banks. Nearing Hulainmo, they came upon a place
where the grass had been stamped flat; here the men danced
before a war or ambush, to work up a fierce spirit, and there
had been dancing in the past few hours. Ahead of them a
group of women, surprised in the path, took fright and fled
into the bushes. In the village itself the banana fronds were
still.
Hulainmo lies a few hundred yards to the north of the
Elokera. Upon reaching it, Weaklekek went alone into the
village, leaving his party on the path. He did not know that,
a few minutes before, Amoli had withdrawn the ambush
party: Amoli had learned that the party was moving in close
array and cautiously, and, since it appeared impossible to
cut out and kill any single member, he had decided against
attacking the whole group—not out of fear of failure, for
it would have been simple to kill them all, but out of respect
for the consequences. To kill Weaklekek would be a very
serious step and one which, Amoli knew, would probably not
be approved by Maitmo, for it would insure open warfare
within the tribe which might not be settled for years to come.
Weaklekek sought out Amoli and talked to him. Amoli
was candid about the purpose of the ambush, and Weaklekek
• 233

warned him that he was very angry about it and that Amoli
and Maitmo were risking serious trouble. Wereklowe himself
was already disturbed: apparently he no longer feels so violently that Walimo should be killed, or not, at least, at the
cost of intertribal war.
Maitmo may also be of this opinion, for the next morning word was sent to Walimo, in the disdainful way that
these things are done, that he might come and fetch his pigs.
Walimo did not go himself, for tempers were still high, but
sent some boys who would not be molested. For the moment Walimo's emergency has passed, but this does not mean
that the whole business is concluded.

Strong winds careened from the southeast, clearing the cloud shreds from the last corners of the valley; the
mountain Arolik was naked in a crystal air, with scars of snow
tracing the crevasses of its upper flanks. The wind and sun
of several days had dried the banana fronds soaked by Lakaloklek at the salt wells, and early this morning she went with
her daughter Eken to the special rock west of her village
where, in a hollow like an oven, the salted fronds were burned.
Weaklekek went with them. He sat in the grass, finishing
a new shell belt and glancing every little while, as the men
do, toward the frontier.
Eken plucked dry leaves of cane as tinder—she had
brought a firebrand from the village—and the long strands.
were heaped onto the flame. The strands were soon reduced
to a gray ash. Lakaloklek picked out the roughage, then
234 •

transferred the fine residue to a piece of banana leaf, taking
it in pinches with her fingers. She had filled her mouth
with water from a gourd, and as she worked she let the
water fall onto the ash so that the salt would cake. The final
pinch, constantly moistened so that more ash would adhere
to it, was rolled around the fire base to retrieve any salt
that she was unable to pick up with her stub hands. Even
so, there was some left, and Uwar came by and salvaged it,
employing a wet fingertip.
Asukwan also came along, seeking diversion; he limps
less than he did before his cure and seems much happier
in his mind. Asukwan sat upon a rock, weaving pretty bracelets out of fern. While Lakaloklek packed the salt in round
thick cakes and bound them neatly in fresh leaves, he and
Weaklekek talked of the day's events. Asok-meke had made
a good recovery and was once more up and about, but in
Abulopak an old woman had died over the night; that afternoon she would be taken by the fire. Maitmo was giving a
large feast in which twenty-three pigs would be killed: this
ceremony would finally close the mourning period held in
honor of his three wives, killed four moons before by the
Wittaia. Apparently U-mue had been invited but was nervous
and upset, for he was supposed to bring a pig; he was short
of pigs these days, as a consequence of the funeral of Yonokma.

When Palek moved away from Homaklep, unable
to suffer or revenge the disgrace put upon him by Asukwan,
he took his family to the sili of Elomaholan in Wuperainma.
Though Elomaholan himself is one of the important wisakun
• 235

men of the Wilil, the other inhabitants of the sili, like Palek
himself, are kepu men of middle age. The sili is a small
and undistinguished one, with a pilai almost innocent of
weapons, and because most of its inhabitants spend their
time in the mountain villages, the sili yard is patched with
stubborn weeds.
Palek stayed but a week or two in Wuperainma. He
came originally from the lands of Kurelu—the name Palek,
which means "No Family," was given to describe his status in
the southern villages—and he decided to return at last to
his native territories. With him he took his luckless wife and
his sons Supuk and Wamatue.
Supuk was one of the best boys in the villages, and the
society of yegerek will miss him, though he himself is probably glad to leave behind the land of his father's disgrace.
Wamatue is too young to care, and doubtless stands this
very moment just inside the door of a cooking shed very
like the one in Homaklep, his toy horim still dangling free
from the region of his navel

236 •

In a lull in the rains an ambush was attempted
in the same gardens where the enemy Huwai had been killed.
The men lay in hiding all day long, but the Wittaia were
alert, knowing that raids would be inevitable. No chance
was offered for a surprise attack, though the raiders waited
until late afternoon. They then returned to the Waraba,
where they were joined on the crest by the supporting party.
The men stood there in the Place of Fear until dusk settled
in the valley, as if at a loss to know how to change their
fortunes.
Another moon had come and gone since the death of
Weake, and he was still unavenged. Of four attempts at ambush, three had ended in frustration and the fourth in the
loss of Yonokma. The days turned past in half-light and
gray rains, a prevailing gloom and dankness which muted
the voices of the children, of the cloud-drenched birds: the
people made no secret of their conviction that their fortunes
had taken a bad turn for the worse and that any further
attempt at raids must end disastrously. Their faith in their
holy stones had been shaken by Yonokma's death but five
days after the stone-cleaning of his father, and as they had
no gods to invoke, they sank into despondency. Nit nai-uk,
they said. We are afraid.
But the full moon's coming brought three fresh clear
nights, and the Southern Cross glittered with promise in the
sky. Day by day the people's spirits rose. Gold-green mornings danced with the bird voices, sparkling in the sun and
gleaming leaves, and the clouds, white and without weight,
drifted off into the blue, and one day Weaklekek and Asikan• 237

alek went off with other warriors to join a war on the north
frontier.
That morning a party of Wittaia had staged a raid on
the Kurelu gardens. They had swum a stream which winds
through the heavy cane brake of the region, then crept
through the dense swamps to the garden edge. No people
were in the garden, nor were there sentries in the nearby
kaio. Disgusted, the Wittaia rose to their feet, and a warrior
went forward to the kaio and climbed up to look around.
But the raid had been detected by the Kurelu, who had
guessed where it was headed. They prepared an ambush and
were lying in wait by the time the enemy had crept up
through the cane. The warrior, nearing the platform of the
kaio, spied the ambushers; he uttered a howl of fear and
warning, and his own party fled, leaving some weapons behind them. The warrior himself jumped to the ground, still
howling, but he was cut off and killed.
In the war that followed, no man on either side was
seriously hurt, and at the end of the afternoon a Kurelu
victory dance was held at the northern etai field. The singing
spread across the Elokera to the paths and gardens of the
southern Kurelu.
Weaklekek and the other men returned in the wake of
the noise, triumphant, and by twilight a formal chanting had
started in Abulopak. Though the victory was not theirs, and
would not remove the need to avenge Weake, the southern
Kurelu felt that their luck had changed. For the first time
in many weeks the whooping rang from all the fields and
villages, taken up and carried onward, to die for a little while
and resume again.
The following day a formal etai was held in the north
and a smaller one at the Liberek. The dancing at the Liberek .
was led by the warriors who had gone to war the day before,
238 •

all but Weaklekek, who rarely dances. Woluklek rarely dances
either, but today he ran fiercely with the rest, as if his life
depended on it.
Walimo, whose blitheness has returned, attended both
celebrations, going early to the north, then hurrying back
four or five miles to dance with his own people.

In the fields above Homaklep, with Kabilek and
Uwar, Tukum played a game of whirligig: the point of the
game was to whirl, arms outstretched like wings, over and
down a steep bank of grass, and to land gracefully on one's
feet at the bottom. Since Tukum landed regularly on his
back, in a stunned, crucified position, the point of the game
was lost on him, and after a while he trudged away.
Down in the little stream which flows past Wuperainma,
some children much smaller than himself, mostly small girls
like Namilike and U-mue's daughter Nylare, were throwing
twigs at dragonflies; they threw delicately, from ambush, as
the dragonflies zipped past. Tukum took charge of this game,
barking orders in his commanding voice, but as he was no
more successful than themselves at downing dragonflies, and
as his frontal assault drove all the dragonflies away, the game
soon ended.
Left to himself, he dug a long, deep burrow in a bank.
Into this he placed an ear-shaped fungus he had found nearby.
He packed it in with earth, then hiperi leaves and grass, then
more earth, then more leaves, and so on, until the burrow
was full. The fungus he called mokat-asuk, or ghost-ear,
• 239

and his idea was that the mokat-asuk would listen for the
return of his father, who is dead. Since Tukum is beset by
his mother and stepfather over the matter of his pigs, he
misses his father very much and would like to have him back.
But, so far as is known, the ceremony of mokat-asuk is not
an effective one, and is in fact unknown to any of the akuni
except for Tukum.

• One afternoon in this period four strangers came
on a visit to Abulopak. Though the men were of the AsukPalek people, a group allied ordinarily with the Wittaia,
they considered themselves safe because two of them had
close relatives in the sili of Wereklowe.
But, despite the new turn in their fortunes, the Kurelu
considered the revenge of Weake and Yonokma incomplete;
in addition, a man arrowed in the inner thigh on the afternoon that the Kurelu were routed from the Waraba had since
died of this wound in the mountain villages. It was therefore
decided to attack the two strangers who had no clansmen,
with the excuse that the two had doubtless come to kill
somebody.
A fierce howling burst the twilight air. One man fled
the sili and, as dark was near, escaped entirely in the heavy
brush which lies just opposite Abulopak. The second took
refuge in the loft of the pilai; he was dragged out to the
yard and speared to death. As most of the men involved were
Wilil, U-mue took loud credit for his clan, a credit which,
in high excitement, he shortly transferred to himself.
The body was taken by the heels and dragged out along
the muddy paths, all the way from Abulopak to the Liberek.
240 •

Tegearek led in the hauling, beside himself with the joy of
violence.
Some boys had been playing in the fields as twilight
came, and these now danced along beside the body, Okal
and Tukum among them, and jabbed at it with their cane
spears. Though Tukum took part, he seemed frightened by
what he was doing, and the next day broke the toy spear he
had used over his own head.
The Asuk-Palek was of middle age and strongly made,
with a large forehead. He had been breathing when the
spearing stopped, a short, ragged sound, but he was dead
long before he reached the Liberek. He lay on his back beneath a high, hard moon, his eyes wide open, an eager smile
upon his face. The face looked oddly trusting and untroubled.
The people were gathering; they danced beneath the
stars.
Husuk came from the Kosi-Alua, an ax gripped in his
hand. Taking the body by the hair, he wrenched it into a
seated position and inspected the spear holes in the back.
The man's mouth fell slack and the eyes stared; for a moment
it seemed that Husuk would sever the head.
He let the body fall.
Tegearek, excited still, dragged the body to the field
edge. Behind a low fence there lay a slough from which
yellow clay is taken in time of war or funeral or etai. The
body was dumped over the fence, then thrown face down
into the ditch. The men prodded it with spears until it slid
beneath the surface, and black bubbles rose. Grass was
thrown on top of it.
Later in the evening the body was taken from the ditch,
and the two Asuk-Paleks who had not been attacked carried
it off beyond the Elokera. The following day a large etai was
held, for the score had been settled at long last, and the
faltering etai-eken of the people had been restored.
• 241

For three months Werene had worked on his new
garden, and finally it was ready to be planted. The roots
and old grass had been burned, the ditches weeded out and
excavated, and a series of new trenches dug: these led away
from the main cross ditch like fat teeth in a jaw, a kind of
harmonious deep scalloping. The ditches were fed by a small
stream draining the brushy wetlands below Anelarok, and
because the garden lay on a slight slope, toward the Baliem,
the large ditch which encircled the whole garden, including
the plots worked by Tegearek, was finished in a series of
steps, perhaps twelve feet apart, so that in dry weather the
water would not pour away. This ditch would also deter
pigs from undoing the work of man.
Between the ditches the new plots, perhaps twenty feet
across and eighty long, had been built high with the excavated earth, and the clods, dried to a gray clay in the sun,
had been broken and leveled. In Werene's half of the new
garden the men's work was finished, and in a day or two
the women would come and plant the shoots of hiperi. Tegearek, who busies himself with war and other matters, had
fallen several weeks behind and still labored fitfully in the
old trenches.
For the most part, Werene had worked all by himself,
his solitary spear and the thin plume of his small fire isolated
on the valley sky. But others had come to help him with the
deepening of the ditches, and in the last weeks he was assisted
almost every day by Hanumoak.
The quarrel which had separated the two brothers years
ago had come about when Werene had ordered Hanumoak,
then still a boy, to go to work out in the gardens. Hanumoak
242 •

had rebelled and, after a dispute which became serious, had
left the sili of Werene and gone to live in Wuperainma. Now,
long after, he had come to work for Werene at last, and,
while the two were not affectionate, they laughed mildly together while they heaved and dug, as if embarrassed and
relieved that their quarrel was at an end.
Hanumoak's own garden plot, part of a large new garden
worked by the men of his pilai, lay down the stream a little
way, across a neck of brushland. This garden, a few days
ahead of Werene's, had already been turned over to the
women, but since Hanumoak had no wife his plot was planted
by the wives of U-mue. For the labor of these women, Hanumoak will be in U-mue's debt, just as Werene will be in debt
to Hanumoak. Between the women as they worked lay a net
filled with hiperi tendrils. They hollowed each hill and buried
in the pit the graceful length of morning-glory vine, so that
only the tip, with its cluster of pretty, heart-shaped leaves,
was exposed to the air and sun. In the grass along the garden
edge the bees hummed sleepily in the midday heat, and a
robin chat sang fitfully its rolling song. From across the fields
a woman's voice rose monotonously, a keening o-ay-wa-ay,
o-wa-ay; o-ay-wa-ay, o-wa-ay, over and over and over.

• 243

A pig of the Wittaia, bent on some hoggish errand in the frontier woods, blundered and snuffled within
view of one of the Kurelu kaios. The men at the kaio waylaid
this pig and escorted it with pomp and ceremony to Abulopak,
where they ate it. The pig was only further evidence of
their new luck, and the next morning the Kurelu, riding the storms of fortune, went to war. This war was led
by Nilik and Yoli: Yoli in recent days had held a holy stone
consecration in Hulibara and, feeling more important than
usual, had enlisted Nilik's support in the initiation of the
stones.
In midmorning a party of warriors slipped down through
the woods north of the Waraba, for the war was to start
with a raid; another party crept to the base of the Waraba
from the Tokolik. The first group crouched and ran along
the cover of the high cane brake which fringes the stream
between the Waraba and Siobara. Some of the warriors wore
mikaks and white feathers which flashed across the fields;
whether for this reason or another, they were seen by Wittaia
sentries on the crest of the Siobara. The sentries scrambled
down among the rocks, silent as ghosts, and by the time the
raiders tried to cross the open place between the hills, the
Wittaia were prepared. They attacked the raiders at this
place, driving them up onto the Waraba, where the first
band rushed to support them. The Kurelu's luck had continued, for none of their men was seriously hurt, while a
Wittaia was struck in the stomach with an arrow and may
die.
Both sides now held back, awaiting reinforcements. In
the slow morning hours before the war commenced, Aloro,
244 •

sitting cross-legged at the fireplace at Homuak, scraped down
a new white bow. He was absorbed in it, paring its ends
long and sharp, using his boar's tusk; the fine white shavings
fell and curled on his cordy shrunken thigh. Later he braced
and bent it into shape between two saplings, his face fixed
in his intense grimace which is not quite a grin.
At the Kosi-Alua kaio near the Tokolik, men gathered
beneath the shelter. It was a damp morning of intermittent
rains, and the sparks of the fire, flying high, caught on the
thatching of the roof. A heap of blazing ferns was knocked
from the crest of the fire, and Wereklowe's son stamped them
to ash with his bare foot. He is still limping from two spear
wounds suffered in the raid in which Yonokma died, and
walks about with a heavy walking stick.
Wereklowe himself came along, striding outward from
the mountains with the rain. His white spear swayed against
the rim, sharp on gray clouds flowing out of the high forest,
down into the valley. He leaned his spear among the rest
on the side of the shelter and crouched down to slip beneath
the thatch; bent, he picked his way around the fire, taking
the men's hands in both his own and smiling his furious wild
smile. Wah, he sighed in his gentle voice, wah, wah. Though
he had no special greeting for his son, who lives apart from
him in his own small village at the edge of the Kosi-Alua,
he came and sat beside him when the round of his greetings
was at an end.
The rain diminished for a time, and the men at the
outer kaios moved on across the swamp to the Waraba. Already warriors of the Kurelu were bunched on the high rocks
toward the Siobara, and on the Siobara itself small parties
of Wittaia were convening. But the rain drifted in again,
and some of the men returned to the reedy knoll at the corner of the L. Asikanalek and Pumeka came together, and
Pumeka was carrying with his good arm Asikanalek's long
• 245

dark spear. Pumeka looked glad and foolish, carrying this
weapon he had never used, and pointed at it in selfdeprecation before the other men could tease him. Asikanalek
laughed, a shrill, high laugh peculiar to him—An nai-UK,
he cried, springing away from Pumeka. I am afraid! And
they laughed together.
When the rain diminished once again, the Wittaia
whooped in challenge, though in fact they were badly outnumbered, not nearly strong enough to take their own end
of the Waraba from the Kurelu. The latter were ranked on
the farthest knoll, overlooking the small meadow and the
stream which separates the Waraba from the Siobara. The
Wittaia had come across the stream, and more approached
along the extension of the meadow from their villages to
the southward. The Kurelu danced down the hill to meet
them. But Nilik, asserting his own power, decided that this
war should be fought in the corner of the Waraba; he stalked
down the slope, screeching at his warriors to pull back, and
finally sent a messenger onto the field. This man, an older
wisakun, was excited and nervous, and the warriors did not
take him very seriously: they shouted, Mare! Mare!—Arrow!
Arrow!—and howled fearfully, and when the old man skittered in alarm, the hillside laughed. But soon the warriors
withdrew until more Wittaia should appear, for the contest
was unequal; one old kain from the northern Kurelu drove
his men back with a fiat blade of his spear.
The warriors climbed up onto the hill, but before they
had returned along the ridge the Wittaia danced forward
on the meadow, jeering and prancing; they wished to fight
on the present ground, suspecting, perhaps, that the Kurelu
had hidden men in the low wood at the corner of the L. The
jeering goaded the Kurelu, and some Wilihiman-Walalua
rushed down the hill again with an awesome drum of feet.
They drove the Wittaia back across the stream and far down
246

•

the meadow to the southward. More Wittaia ran up from
the rear, while a few of their best warriors, wheeling and
crouching down and switching their arrowheads back and
forth on bows drawn taut, dispersed the charge.
The battle line quickly stabilized on the meadow to
the southward, where the narrow terrain, bordered on one
side by a dense brake and on the other by the tangled growth
of the old gardens, offset the advantage in numbers held by
the Kurelu. A hundred or more men on each side were now
actually fighting, and the line spread out into the brush. The
battle was led, for the first time in several moons, by the
Wilihiman-Walalua, and particularly by Weaklekek and Asikanalek, who are leaders in a way that a warrior like Aloro,
with his own cause to fight, is not. Asikanalek, in the early
afternoon, led the dangerous skirmishing in the gardens, ducking and feinting and shooting forward to invite attack from
hidden Wittaia who might thereby show themselves. Supported as he was by warriors like Huonke—Huonke looked
grim and set but did not venture forward—Asikanalek fought
his battle almost single-handed. In war Asikanalek is quite
different from the gentle, shyly smiling man who built his
pilai all alone, who grieved so passionately for Weake: he is
reckless to the point of madness when possessed by battle.
Weaklekek quartered the meadow, moving swiftly and
powerfully along the line, directing the other men; Weaklekek has found himself again, after a long period when the
old arrow point still in his leg, with the responsibility he took
upon himself for the death of Weake, had crippled his huge
spirit. His leadership inspired his men, and his strong commands appeared to keep their injuries at a minimum. In an
hour of fighting, but two warriors, with arrows through the
forearm and the foot, were led back to the hill, while a third
arrow, scarcely penetrating, was removed on the battlefield
from the shoulder of big Woknabin. Woknabin wandered
• 247

back unaided, an expression of confusion and hurt feelings
on his rough, foolish face.
When Aloro received his inevitable wound, he retired
behind the hill. Unlike Woknabin, he did not go home but
helped remove the arrow points from the wounded who came
later. He still carried his old bow, for the new one is not
completed, and after he had drawn the arrow point from the
calf of a young elege his bow and arrows were returned to
him respectfully by the boy who held them.
Tegearek, Tuesike, Hanumoak, and Siba shot steadily
and carefully, and Walimo ran wild in his odd skittish way.
Siloba too fought bravely for Weaklekek. Like his friend
Yonokma, he has left the ranks of elege to join the adult
warriors. Feckless as ever, he dodged arrows all afternoon,
running back and forth in his loose, loping stride, shouting
and laughing. When Siloba runs, all the bones in his arms
and legs seem thrown to the toes and fingers, yanking him
in all direction, yet this disjointedness is pure high, spirits,
a crazy joy in his own being, and despite it he maintains
a frantic grace. His courage has not made him a good warrior, but on this afternoon he contrived to escape the wound
inflicted on him almost every time he decides to fight, confining himself to a sprained foot acquired in a leap of pure
abandon.
Woluklek also spent his afternoon in the forward line,
preoccupied and solitary, dallying with spent arrows. Now
and again he would pause to gaze around him, as if not quite
certain where he was, and smile shyly at his friends. Even
Ekali of Wuperainma joined the warriors briefly, but soon
he retired to the hill: his long hands shook badly as he lit
his tobacco. Ekali is made miserable with dread, with the
necessity to save face, in time of war.
Of all the important southern warriors, only Yeke Asuk
and Tekman Bio took no part in the fighting. Yeke Asuk
248 •

has lately acquired a taste for the rear echelons, while Tekman Bio is still chastened by his spear wound. They sat in
the ranks on the hill above, three or four hundred strong
beneath their spears, and behind them the sun emerged
through a turbulence of black clouds, catching the greased
shoulders, the long spear tips, the white feathers. With a
Wittaia death so recently behind them, they were all in
great good spirits, and laughter rang out frequently among
the howls of war. In the height of battle a dove hurtled up
across the hill, and the men leapt to their feet, straining after
it with their spear points, so that the hilltop swayed as with
a wind, but the dove escaped, and the men groaned goodnaturedly. At other times they cheered and hooted the efforts
of their own elege, who were conducting a side war with
the older boys of the Wittaia. The elege faced one another
across the stream where it broke from the tall stands of cane
to cross the soft meadow between the hills. They fired their
poor arrows back and forth, shouting insults without rancor
in the terrible cracked cries of adolescence.
A Wittaia warrior came and sat among his elege, on
the bank directly opposite the elege of the Kurelu. Putting
his hands behind his head, he leaned back into the grass,
calling out comments on the boys' poor aim and inviting
them to shoot at him. Both sides laughed at this, and for
a little while it seemed that the war was little more than
a harmless game, a sport, for only a few warriors had been
hurt all afternoon, none of them badly. The rain had gone
and the day was bright, with lovely shadows in the soft
harmony of mountains. The men of both sides ran up and
down, fine-feathered and with fanfare, tossing their long
hair from side to side, stopping suddenly to cock their spears
in comic menace at an enemy too far away to threaten them,
and leaping up and down for the sheer splendor of it, the
sun burnishing their skin.
• 249

Yoli remained high on the hill, conferring with Nilik
at every opportunity in an effort to identify himself with
leadership. Nilik, annoyed that his will had been disobeyed
in regard to the choice of battleground, paid no heed to Yoli.
High on the hill, he glared out at the battlefield, clutching
his beautiful carved arrows. Nilik's head was low and forward, like the head of a falcon, and his hands were clenched.
The men ranged up and down below them, yipping
lustily—Kip, kip, kip, kip—hoo-r-ra, hoo-r-ra—and now and
then there rose the deep abysmal groan vented by both sides
when a man is struck. Wereklowe came to the crest, gazing
down excitedly on the battle ground, and with him Polik,
his hair down across his shoulders, brandishing his great
spear and shouting: Polik wished revenge for a woman of
his sili killed by Wittaia raiders three days before, and his
face with its deep lines and stony eyes wore the wild, haunted
expression that it must have had in the violent days when
his name was Mokat.
Wari~gi-jee! he bellowed. Wari-gi-jee!
Listen, you people . . .
Po-kan Kul-ma! Po-kan Kul-ma!
Now watch the ones along the Kulma stream. . . .
E-lop-i-nima! E-lop-i-nima!
Move back! Move back!
Tugi! Tugi!
Strike them! Strike them!
But Polik's voice is a part of every war, and though
the men are in awe of him, and think him a great kain, they
paid small heed to his fierce ranting, for Polik is growing
old and goes no longer to the battle line.
The battle waned, renewed again, the egret wands whirling on the Wittaia side, the twirling black whisks of cassowary. A bird of paradise sang from the wood behind the
Waraba, and some of the warriors took up its strident call.
In a lull some Wittaia fled up and down, running and
250 •

feinting with their spears, spinning their white wands, stopping short to snap their bow cords, leaping, menacing, loping
back—an elaborate dance, performed and observed in utter
silence. The nearest Kurelu was five hundred yards away,
yet the dance was part of war and taken seriously. Then these
warriors screeched suddenly, as if under attack, and the
screech was answered: the Kurelu on the hill talked faster,
laughing and pointing but intent, and then as one they leapt
away down the hill, spears high, in a din of whooping and
running feet struck down forcefully upon the earth, an avalanche of black muscle and white feathers. The battle raged
between the silent hills and then, as transient as a thunder
squall, it ended, and the men streamed back, singing in etai.
The wild battle had been indecisive, and both sides claimed
victory.
The Wittaia gathered at the base of the Siobara, and
the enemies sat in the warm, waning sun, shouting out insults and shrill laughter. The insults included coarse remarks
about the women of their foes—Go home to your sluts before your hiperi grows cold!—and each sally was carried
forth on a wave of loud delight, a cheering and whistling.
Then the Wittaia would respond, while the Kurelu kept
silent; the Kurelu not only wished to hear what the enemy
had to say but laughed aloud when it was humorous.
Then, toward twilight, Asikanalek led a wild, sudden
charge across the meadow, screeching furiously, legs flying
through the grass as he shot forward, long spear tilted on
the sky. He spun gracefully to avoid an arrow and rushed
onward, infusing his own recklessness in the men behind
him, and for a moment the fighting was fierce and silent.
Then the Wittaia broke ranks and gave ground. Asikanalek
and his men did not pursue them, for the glorious charge had
been the point; they raced back to the hill, leaping and
smiling.
Dark was coming from the mountains, and the Kurelu
• 251

climbed back up onto the hill, against the sky. Woluklek
kept off to one side, still smiling sheepishly, as if he had no
right to be there. They filed homeward down the Waraba,
through the white flowers of rhododendron. Content with
Asikanalek's last charge, which had brought their mild victory to an end, they paid no heed to the few Wittaia who
pranced back to the battle line as they departed.
Spears on their shoulders, the men splashed across the
swamp. They trailed along the Tokolik past the black ponds,
then crossed the frontier woods into another world, where
gardens breathed the heat of the last sun. A gold light washed
the beds of dozing hiperi, in the slow folding of the lavenderhearted flowers. From the day's trash fires a thin smoke
strayed and vanished; ducks gabbled in the water lilies of
the long ditches ahead, and evening herons flew. Children's
voices drifted from the villages, and the gold light rose to
the mountain rim, the clouds.
Now the wild duck shot up out of the lilies in neat
sprinkles of silver drops; they fled like black shreds of night
across the softening sky. Ahead of the men, on the shoulders
of their friends, swayed two warriors hurt badly in the last
charge.

252 •

The mother of Tukum has been having trouble
with Asok-meke, her husband, and has gone away to her own
people at Lukigin, on the far side of the Elokera. Tukum
remained behind in Wuperainma, but yesterday he was reprimanded by Asok-meke for permitting one of their pigs to
wander away toward the frontier at the Aike. Tukum is at
times forgetful about his pigs, being readily distracted by
other children, dragonflies, puddles of water, and wild foods,
and the chances are that Asok-meke was in the right.
Nevertheless, Tukum is a very proud little boy, and
since his nami lives in Lukigin, where his mother has already
gone, he has decided to go away for good. This morning he
put on his thin neck the cowrie collar with its brief string
of shells which is his sole belonging; he smeared his body
with pig grease until it shone, in order to make a fine impression at Lukigin. There, perhaps, he will be known as
Pua. Then he set off alone on the long journey in the sun
across the woods and fields, a small brown figure with a flat
head and pot belly. His back was turned on Wuperainma,
his pigs and his friends, his childhood, and he clutched a
frail stick in his hand.

A pig has been stolen from Kurelu, and it may be
a sign of his weakening power that he is abroad among the
villages, conscripting help. In former days to steal from
Kurelu would have invited death, but now someone has dared
• 253

it. As late as a few moons ago Kurelu appeared quite commonly in the southern villages, and his claim to control all
the southern lands was taken seriously. But now he rarely
comes, and his appearance on this errand will be noted, for
it may signal the beginning of the end of his long leadership and the ascendancy of the hungry Nilik.
Four new moons had come and gone, and the great
cicadas, anikili, no longer filled the twilight woods with
their shrill ringing. In the morning-of-bird-voices, the whistlers sang fitfully, in a kind of wistful torpor, leaving the
midday silences to the shrill discords of kites, the searching
cries of birds of passage paused a moment in the high limbs
of the araucaria. For this—midwinter August—was the season
between nestings. At night, the frogmouths and nightjars,
the stealthy owls, moved without sound, and the tree frogs
clung like wet leaves to their perches.
The red flowers of the ginger plant had vanished from
the fields, replaced by scarlet of the myrtle karoli; the karoli,
drab since early May, had burst forth in new flowering. On
other plants, the petals fallen were restored on the next bush,
so that the land maintained its dappling of lavenders, of reds
and whites and yellows, renewing its cycles without cease
under the high sun of the equator.
In the gardens abandoned above Wuperainma, the grass
choked off the last weak leaves of hiperi, but new gardens
had been hacked and wrenched from the savanna and even
now were being planted. Akuni had died and gone up in
the fire—Weake, Yonokma, old Eak, a few others, and just
recently, despite all her precautions, Wako Aik. The infant
daughter of Weaklekek had also died quite suddenly, and
Weaklekek, who had delighted in this child, smeared himself with mud and cried, but the grief of his young wife was
still more terrible. U-mue's baby, now three months old, had
at last been named Woraisige, after the fact that her mother
254 •

had been picking worai orchids at the time of her abduction
by the dynamic kain of the Wilil.
Yeke Asuk and Tekman Bio had new spears, Aloro a
new bow, and the new bow had already taken life; in recent
days the enemy had killed Tikiliak of Mapiatma, but two
of the raiders had been cut down, one of them by Aloro's
swift arrows.
Tukum had moved away from Wuperainma, but another
boy had come. Elomaholan's sili had grown weedy with disuse, but a new one was under construction just behind that
of Asok-meke. Natorek in recent days had tied on his first
horixn, though for the nonce he wore it in much the same
casual fashion as had Supuk's little brother. Some of Walimo's
pigs, it was now agreed, would be seized and eaten, and if
he pretended not to notice it, the whole episode would be
forgotten.
In the days after his daughter's funeral, Weaklekek
climbed slowly to the top of his kaio tower. He was much
saddened by the death and stared heavily at the silent Aike.
Two white egrets in a near ditch craned their long necks at a
stiff forward angle, rigid as stalks, and a blue-gray mokoko
flapped off toward the Tokolik, rasping its cry. The mokoko
was a more common heron than the white egret, and Weaklekek saw one every day, flying sometimes with its long neck
outstretched or soaring high over the valley, two things which
the egret never did. The mokoko was a strange bird, always
solitary.
A strange smoke drifted on the wind from down the
valley. There the remnants of Wako Aik's Mokoko tribe
clustered for protection around the village of the Waro; this
people had come out of the sky to live on the Mokokos' abandoned lands.
In the way that tue meant "bird," waro meant "snake"
or "insect." The first Waro had come to the Kurelu just after
• 255

the last mauwe, through the land of the Wittaia. He had
white skin, and he was accompanied by black men dressed
like himself. The strangers had been stopped at the frontier,
and a warrior named Awulapa, brother of Tamugi, had been
shot down and killed by a Waro weapon with a noise that
echoed from the mountains. Though these men had fled, the
Waro had not left the valley; already they were building
huts among the river tribes throughout the valley.
While he kept watch, Weaklekek's hands moved rhythmically in the sun, for once again he had started a long shell
belt. He was proud of the old ways, proud that his own
people went on as they always had since the time of Nopu.
But from the Waro changes in the land had come, brought
by the wind: a strange blue flower had rooted in the fields,
and in an old oak by Homuak there was a yellow stinging
bee. This bee gathered in large swarms, howling in the hollow
wood like a bad wind in the rocks of the Turaba; in the
past moons it had come across the swamps and gardens from
the Waro village on the Baliem. The blue flower and the
yellow bee did not belong in the akuni world and had no
name.

256 •

THE

30

NILIK

G R E A T

K A

INS

35

MAITMO

THE

GREAT

K A I N S (Continued)

U-MUE:
HIS

FAMILY

AND
SOME
CHILDREN
OF

HIS

VILLAGE

43

EKAPUWE

SOME

TRIBESMEN

52

HANUMOAK

5 6 - 6 3 . W E A K L E K E K AND
(58

and

63 Lakaloklek)

HIS

FAMILY

THE

WARRIORS

TUKUM
THE
SWINEHERD

ASIKANALEK
A N D

HIS

FAMILY

THE

DEATH

OF

WEAKE

79

WOLUKLEK

81

HUONKE

Photographic Section II:
THE PEOPLE OF THE BOOK

THE GREAT

KAINS:

28 Kurelu
KARL HEIDER
29 Nilik of the clan Walilo (etai)
PETER MATTHIESSEN
30 Nilik
PETER MATTHIESSEN
31 Polik of the clan Halluk
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
32 Wereklowe of the clan Alua
ELIOT ELISOFON
33 Polik (etai)
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
34 Wereklowe (at funeral of Weake: note chair)
JAN BROEKHUYSE

35 Maitmo of the clan Haiman
36 Limo of the clan Alua
37 Husuk of the clan Kosi
38 U-mue of the clan Wilil

PETER MATTHIESSEN
KARL HEIDER
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
ELIOT ELISOFON

U-MUE AND HIS FAMILY:
39 With Ekapuwe's new baby
40 His mother Aneake
47 Hugunaro

SAMUEL PUTNAM
SAMUEL PUTNAM
ELIOT ELISOFON
• x v ii

42

Aku (left)

43

Ekupuwe

THE
44

and Nylare

SAMUEL PUTNAM
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER

CHILDREN

OF U-MUE'S

SILI:

Uwar

MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER

45

Holake (right) and Oluma

46

Natorek

SAMUEL PUTNAM

47

Kabilek

PETER MATTHIESSEN

48

Werekma

SOME
49

KARL HEIDER

ROBERT GARDNER

TRIBESMEN:

Yonokma (holding pig's head, at father's feast: he was
killed five days later)

PETER MATTHIESSEN

50

Werene, or Parrot

51

Yoroick, or Pigeon (at etai celebrating revenge of

52

Hanumoak, young brother of Pigeon and Parrot

KARL HEIDER

death of his son Ekitamalek)

ELIOT ELISOFON

PETER MATTHIESSEN
53

Yeke Asuk, brother of TJ-mue (paring spear blade with
boar's-tusk scraper)

KARL HEIDER

54

Loliluk, father of Uwar, Natorek, Werekma

55

Walimo, whom Maitmo and Wereklowe wished to kill

ELIOT ELISOFON

SAMUEL PUTNAM

WEAKLEKEK
56

Weaklekek

57

In his pilai

AND

HIS

FAMILY:
PETER MATTHIESSEN
ROBERT GARDNER

58

With his wife Lakaloklek

59

His daughters, Eken (left) and Noarige, who died

PETER MATTHIESSEN

MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
60

With Yeke Asuk (left) on Waraba

PETER MATTHIESSEN

61

Dodging arrow, below Siobara

62

Returning to village (note Siobara in distance)

MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER

JAN BROEKHUYSE
63

Lakaloklek

xviii

•

JAN BROEKHUYSE

THE
64
65
66

WARRIORS:

Aloro the lame man
PETER MATTHIESSEN
Tegearek, war kain of the Wilil
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
Apeore, whose name means Killed-by-strangling
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER

67
68

Siloba (left) and Asukwan
Tekman Bio, in a charge down the Waraba

ROBERT GARDNER

MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER

69

Siba

70

Tuesike (right) with body of Yonokma

TUKUM THE
71-73
74

MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER

At funeral of his friend Weake

ROBERT GARDNER

AND HIS FAMILY:

Asikanalek, young war kain of clan Alua, leading a
charge

76 His daughter Namilike
77

ROBERT CARDNER

SWINEHERD:

His day

ASIKANALEK
75

KARL HEIDER

His old father Eak, who died

SAMUEL PUTNAM
ELIOT ELISOFON
ELIOT ELISOFON

THE DEATH OF WEAKE:
78

The twins: Okal (standing), who went to river with

79

Woluklek, who led boys to river
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
Weake, with Asikanalek and wife of Tamugi

Weake

80

SAMUEL PUTNAM

MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER

81

Huonke, uncle of Weake (hunting mice for purification
ceremony)

JAN BROEKHUYSE

83

Tamugi the griever
MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER
Weake's sister, Iki Abusake, who lost her fingers

84

The murdered Asuk-Palek, whose death revenged

82

MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER

Weake
85 Etai, twilight

SAMUEL PUTNAM

MICHAEL ROCKEFELLER

• xix

Acknowledgments
I should like to express my gratitude to the expedition members, not only for the assistance acknowledged in the Preface, but for
permission to use the excellent photographs included in this book.
I am also indebted to Mr. Hobart Van Deusen and Dr. Thomas
Gilliard of the American Museum of Natural History, who prepared
me for the fauna of New Guinea's Central Highlands, and to Miss
Lily Perry of the Arnold Arboretum of Harvard, who instructed me
in the fundamentals of its flora; Mr. Chris Versteegh, the botanist
of the Dutch Government who joined the expedition for a brief period, made an invaluable contribution in the field.
In Hollandia, in addition to Dr. J. V. de Bruyn, Miss Lou Von
Zanden of the Office of Native Affairs was very courteous and helpful,
and Mr. J. R. Schroo of Hollandia's Bureau of Soils was kind enough
to furnish information on the geology and soils of the Baliem Valley.
For many forms of hospitality and kindness received in my journeys to and from New Guinea, I remain indebted to the following:
Luisa and Domenico Gnoli (Rome); El Amin Sulfab (Juba, Sudan);
Hamdan Mohamed (Nimule, Sudan); Miss Ulla Mai Ekblad (Nairobi,
Kenya); Patrick and Hennie Hemingway (Arusha, Tanganyika);
Ruth Jhabvala (Delhi); Mr. and Mrs. Clair Weeks (Kathmandu,
Nepal); Mme. Françoise Teynac (Angkor Wat, Cambodia-Hong
Kong); George Chi (Hong Kong); Jorge Borges (Macao); Mrs. Jean
Austin (Heron Island, Australia); Misses Carol and Gay Plowman
(Sydney); Joy and Kenneth Plowman (Sydney); Mr. and Mrs. Bryan
Warne (Sydney); Betty and George Edwards (Newcastle, Australia);
John Haereraaroa (Moorea, French Oceania); Patsy and Mike Goldberg (Belvedere, California); Evan Connell and Max Steele (San
Francisco).
For expert advice, and for unstinting interest and patience, I
should like to thank my friend and editor, Marshall Best, and the
excellent staff at the Viking Press, in the hope that this book will
justify their effort.
xx •

Glossary of Personal Names

Each name is followed by a guide to pronunciation, a translation
in italics, identification of the person bearing the name, and, in
parentheses, the village in which he lives. The number identifies
the photograph in which the person appears.

AKU. a-KOO (after piece of land toward Siep-Kosi), daughter of
U-mue (Wuperainma), 42
ALOKA. A-lo-ka (Very Late Born), boy blind in one eye (Mapiatma)
ALORO. A-lo-ro (The Cripple), war kain of clan Wilil (Abulopak), 64
AMOLI. A-mo-li (He Who Replaces), violent kain of clan Haiman (Hulainmo)
ANEAKE. a-NAY-a-kay (Bad Voice), mother of U-mue and Yeke
Asuk (Wuperainma), 40
APEORE. a-PAY-or-ay (Killed by Strangling), warrior of clan
Wilil (Lokoparek), 66
ASIKANALEK. A-si-KAN-a-lek (No Sound of Bow), young war
kain of clan Alua (Abukumo), 75, 80
ASISAL. A-si-SAL (Extruded Rectum), old father of Siloba (Mapiatma)
ASOK-MEKE. ah-SAWK-mek-KAY (Outsider), stepfather of Tukum (Wuperainma)
xxii

•

ASUKWAN. ah-SOOK-wan

(Long Ear), young warrior of clan
Walilo (Homaklep), 67
EAK. AY-ak (The Little One), old father of Asikanalek (Abukumo), 77
EKALI. AY-kah-lee (Shame), kepu man, father of boy Kabilek
(Wuperainma), 12
EKAPUWE. ay-KAP-oo-way (?), wife of U-mue, formerly Wittaia
woman (Wuperainma), 43
EKEN. AY-ken (Seed, or Flower), daughter of Weaklekek (Homaklep), 59
EKTTAMALEK. ay-kee-TAM-a-lek (Empty Fist), slain son of Yoroick (Kibitsilimo), 11
ELOMAHOLAN. el-LO-ma-ho-LAHN (Wife Taken Away), old
"medicine man" of clan Wilil (Wuperainma)
HANUMOAK. HA-num-o-AK (Tobacco Pipe), young warrior,
brother of Yoroick and Werene (Wuperainma), 52
HOLAKE. HO-la-kay (Path of Women), young daughter of
Wereklowe (Wuperainma), 45
HUGUNARO. Hoo-GOO-na-ro (Sitting Opposite), jealous wife of
U-mue, mother of Aku (Wuperainma), 41
HUONKE. HOO-wonk-ay (Little Stone Ax), uncle of slain boy
Weake (Sulaki), 81
HUSUK. HOO-suk (Dives under Water), war kain of clan Kosi
(Kibitsilimo), 37
IKI ABUSAKE. EE-kee a-BOO-sa-kay (Hand That Cannot Help
Itself), little sister of slain boy Weake (Abulopak), 83
KABILEK. KA-bee-lek (Sharp Not), son of Ekali (Wuperainma),
47
KOALARO. ko-AH-la-ro (She Who Left Her Man), wife of U-mue,
sister of slain youth Yonokma (Wuperainma)
KURELU. KOO-rel-OO (Wise Egret), great kain of tribe (villages
in north Kurelu), 28
LAKALOKLEK. LAK-a-lawk-lek (She Who Would Not Wait), wife
of Weaklekek (Homaklep), 58, 63
LIMO. LEE-mo (Treeless Place), tall war kain of clan Alua
(Sinisiek), 36
LOLILUK. LO-lee-LOOK (Bones Ungathered), father of Uwar,
Werekma, Natorek (Wuperainma), 54
• xx i i i

MAITMO. MITE-mo

(Near Village Ditch), fierce war kain of
clan Haiman (north Kurelu), 35
NAMILIKE. na-MEE-lee-kay (Hope She Won't Die), small daughter of Asikanalek (Abukumo), 76
NATOREK. na-to-REK (Mauwe Ceremony—when he was born),
small brother of Uwar (Wuperainma), 46
NILIK. NEE-leek (Present at Pig Eating), kain of clan Walilo
(Kulmo), 29, 30
NYLARE. NY-la-ray (My Village), small daughter of U-mue
(Wuperainma), 42
OKAL. OH-kal (The Roamer), one of twins: friend of slain boy
Weake (Mapiatma), 78
OLUMA. OH-loo-ma (species of tree—at the foot of which he was
born), friend of small boy Natorek (Wuperainma), 45
PALEK. PA-lek (No Family), father of Supuk, husband of woman
raped by Asukwan (Homaklep; later, Wuperainma)
POLIK. PO-leek (He Who Came Up from Behind), kain of clan
Halluk (Abulopak), 31, 33
PUMEKA. POO-may-ka (Water Snake), crippled woodcutter
(Sinisiek)
SIBA. SEE-ba (a kind of insect, with connotation of beauty as a
child), young warrior of clan Wilil (Wuperainma), 69
SILOBA. SEE-lo-ba (He Who Goes Out Even in Rain), young
warrior; friend of slain youth Yonokma (Wuperainma), 67
SUPUK. SOO-pook (roof section of women's hut), son of Palek
(Homaklep)
TAMUGI. TA-moo-gee (a tree marsupial), brother-in-law of Huonke (Abulopak), 82
TEGEAREK. TAY-GAY-a-REK (Spear Death), young war kain of
clan Wilil (Wuperainma), 65
TEKMAN BIO. TEK-man BEE-o (Remains Away), warrior of clan
Halluk (Wuperainma; Abulopak), 68
TUESIKE. too-AY-see-KAY (Bird Bow), warrior of clan Wilil
(Wuperainma), 70
TUKUM. TOO-kum (area of men's hut in front of hearth), small
swineherd stepson of Asok-meke (Wuperainma), 71-74
U-MUE. OO-moo-ay (The Anxious One), political kain of clan
Wilil (Wuperainma), 38, 39
x xi v •

UWAR. YOU-wahr

(after Uwar River in land of Siep-Kosi), son
of Loliluk (Wuperainma), 44
WAKO AIK. WAH-ko a-EEK (Worm Biting in Stomach), dying
mother of Uwar (Wuperainma)
WALIMO. WAH-lee-mo (Shell Bib), condemned young warrior
of clan Alua (Hulibara), 55
WAMATUE. wah-MAH-too-ay (Bird in Pig Stall), small brother
of Supuk (Homaklep)
WEAKE. WAY-a-kay (Bad Path), slain boy, friend of Okal, Tukum
(Abulopak), 34, 80
WEAKLEKEK. way-AK-le-kek (The Bad Man), young war kain of
clan Alua (Homaklep), 56-58, 60-62
WENELUKE. wen-EL-oo-kay (Pig Thieves), boy painter of cave
drawings (Lokoparek)
WEREKLOWE. way-REK-lo-way (He Who Never Works in
Fields), great kain of clan Alua (Abulopak), 32, 34
WEREKMA. way-REK-ma (There Are Daughters), daughter of
Loliluk (Wuperainma), 48
WERENE. Way-re-nay (Parrot), brother of Yoroick and Hanumoak (Homaklep), 50
WOKNABIN. WOK-na-been (Take Me with You),
half-blind
warrior of clan Wilil (Abulopak)
WOLUKLEK. wo-LOO-klek (Was Not Rewarded),
the solitary
man who led Weake to river (Mapiatma), 79
YEKE ASUK. YAY-kay a-SOOK (Dog Ear), brother of U-mue
(Wuperainma), 53, 60
YOLI. YO-lee (species of myrtle, used for spears), father of Walimo (Hulibara)
YONOKMA. yo-NAWK-ma (The Wanderer), slain young brother
of Koalaro (Wuperainma), 49, 70
YOROICK. yo-ROYK (Pigeon), father of slain warrior Ekitamalek
(Kibitsilino), 51
YULI. YOU-lee (Piece), young wife of U-mue (Wuperainma)

•

xxv

Dani Words Used Commonly in Text

AKUNI. a-KOO-nee, the People, i.e., the Kurelu

EBEAI. AY-bay-ai, women's round house
ELEGE. ay-lay-gay, youths
ETAI. AY-tai, "singing," i.e., victory dance
ETAI-EKEN. AY-tai AY-ken, "seed of singing," i.e., soul
HIPERI. HIP-eree, sweet potato (also, food)
HORIM. ho-REEM, gourd penis sheath
HUNUK PALIN. HOO-nuk pa-LEEN, given to fits of violence and
manic bravery.
IKI PALIN. ee-kee pa-LEEN, finger-cutting ceremony
KAIN. (as in "swine"), leader
KAIO. KAI-o, lookout tower
KEPU. kay-POO, cowardly: without worth
MAUWE. MOW-way, feasting period of marriage and initiation
MIKAK. MEE-kak, section of large baler shell, worn under chin
PAVI. PA-vee, species of tree (slang: enemy or excrement)
PILAI. PEE-lai, men's round house
SILL SEE-lee, compound, one or more of which comprises village
TOA. TOE-a, large edible grass
WAM WISA. worn WEE-sa, sacramental pig
WISA. WEE-sa, infused with supernatural power
WISAKUN. WEE-sa-kun, "medicine man"
YEGEREK. YEG-air-ek, children between infancy and puberty
xxvi •

Index

xxxii •

